The Official CompTIA® A+® Core 1\nStudent Guide (Exam 220-1001)

COPYRIGHT NOTICE\nCopyright © 2019 CompTIA, Inc. All rights reserved. Screenshots used for illustrative purposes are the property of the software proprietor. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of CompTIA, 3500 Lacey Road, Suite 100, Downers Grove, IL 60515-5439. This book conveys no rights in the software or other products about which it was written; all use or licensing of such software or other products is the responsibility of the user according to terms and conditions of the owner. If you believe that this book, related materials, or any other CompTIA materials are being reproduced or transmitted without permission, please call 1-866-835-8020 or visit www.help.comptia.org.

Table of Contents\nLesson 1: Installing and Configuring PC Components................................................ 1\nTopic A: Use Appropriate Safety Procedures...................................................................2\nTopic B: PC Components.................................................................................................. 13\nTopic C: Common Connection Interfaces.......................................................................34\nTopic D: Install Peripheral Devices................................................................................. 52\nTopic E: Troubleshooting Methodology..........................................................................63\ntag: C1 TOC

The Official CompTIA® IT Fundamentals+ (Exam FC0-U61)\nIn this course, you will install, configure, optimize, troubleshoot, repair, upgrade, and perform preventive maintenance on personal computers and digital devices. You will:\n• Install and configure PC system unit components and peripheral devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot display and multimedia devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot storage devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot internal system components.\n• Explain network infrastructure concepts.\n• Configure and troubleshoot network connections.\n• Implement client virtualization and cloud computing.\n• Support and troubleshoot laptops.\n• Support and troubleshoot mobile devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot print devices.\ntag: C1

LESSON INTRODUCTION\nA very large percentage of the work that most IT technicians do entails working with hardware, including installing, upgrading, repairing, configuring, maintaining, optimizing, and troubleshooting computer components.\nIn this lesson, you will turn your attention to the computer's system components and peripheral devices. You will see how they are connected and configured to create a customizable PC platform.\ntag: C1 L1

LESSON OBJECTIVES\nIn this lesson, you will:\n• Use appropriate safety procedures for avoiding hazards associated with PC support and minimize the risk of damage from ESD.\n• Identify PC components.\n• Identify common connection interfaces and the cables and connectors used with them.\n• Install peripheral devices.\n• Identify procedures and techniques to employ when troubleshooting.\ntag: C1 L1

Topic A: Use Appropriate Safety Procedures\nTo complete PC support tasks without damaging the equipment that you are servicing or causing physical injury to yourself or others, there are several tools to use and operational procedures to follow in order to get the job done quickly, safely, and correctly. In this topic, you will identify the best practices for PC technicians to follow to promote electrical and environmental safety.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

LOCAL GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS\nWhen performing PC maintenance work, you may need to take account of compliance with government regulations. Regulations that typically affect PC maintenance or the installation of new equipment are:\n• Health and safety laws: Keeping the workplace free from hazards.\n• Building codes: Ensuring that fire prevention and electrical systems are intact and safe.\n• Environmental regulations: Disposing of waste correctly.\nFor example, in the United States, the most common safety regulations are those issued by the federal government, such as the Occupational Safety and Health\nAdministration (OSHA), and state standards regarding employee safety. OSHA-interest and skill levels, compliant employers must provide:\n• A workplace that is free from recognized hazards that could cause serious physical harm.\n• Personal protective equipment designed to protect employees from certain \nhazards.\n• Communication—in the form of labeling, Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs), and training about hazardous materials.\nWhile specific regulations may vary from country to country and state to state, in general employers are responsible for providing a safe and healthy working environment for their employees. Employees have a responsibility to use equipment in the workplace in accordance with the guidelines given to them and to report any hazards. Employees should also not interfere with any safety systems, including signs or warnings or devices such as firefighting equipment. Employees should not introduce or install devices, equipment, or materials to the workplace without authorization or without making an assessment of the installation.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

HEALTH AND SAFETY PROCEDURES\nA company's health and safety procedures should be set out in a handbook, possibly as part of an employee's induction handbook. Health and safety procedures should:\n• Identify what to do in the event of a fire or other emergency.\n• Identify responsible persons (for example, for overall health and safety, nominated first aiders, fire marshals, and so on).\n• Identify hazardous areas in the workspace and precautions to take when entering them.\n• Describe best practice for use and care of the workspace and equipment within it.\n• Establish an incident reporting procedure for detecting and eliminating workplace hazards and accidents.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

GENERAL EMERGENCY PROCEDURES\nHere is a general procedure for emergency situations:\n1. Raise the alarm and contact the emergency services, giving them a description of the emergency and your location.\n2. If possible, make the scene safe. For example, if you are faced with a fire, establish that you have an escape route, or if faced with electrical shock, disconnect the power (if it is safe for you to do so).\n3. If you have training and it is safe to do so, do what you can to tackle the emergency (for example, give first aid or use firefighting equipment). Of course, circumstances might dictate that you do something differently. It is vital that you keep calm and do not act rashly.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

ELECTRICAL HAZARDS\nThe most prevalent physical hazards that computer technicians face are electrical hazards. Electricity is necessary to run a computer, but it can also damage sensitive computer equipment, and in some cases, pose a danger to humans. Following established best practices for promoting electrical safety will protect not only the computer equipment that you work on, but also your personal safety and the safety of others.\nElectrical equipment can give an electric shock if it is broken, faulty, or installed incorrectly. An electric shock can cause muscle spasms, severe burns, or even kill (electrocution). \nElectrical currents can pass through metal and most liquids, so neither should be allowed to come into contact with any electrical device installations. Damaged components or cables are also a risk and should be replaced or isolated immediately. It is important to test electrical devices regularly. The frequency will depend on the environment in which the device is used. In some countries, testing (PAT) carried out by a qualified electrician or technician ensures that a device is safe to use.\nThe human body is an electrical conductor and a resistor, so a current will pass through it and make it heat up, manifesting as a burn if the current is strong enough. A current can interfere with the body's nervous system, which also uses electrical signals. This might manifest as spasm or paralysis or in a severe case cause a heart attack.\nCollateral injuries occur when involuntary muscle contractions caused by the shock cause the body to fall or come in contact with sharp edges or electrically live parts. Electricity can hurt you even if you are careful and avoid becoming part of an electrical ground circuit. The heat generated by an electric arc or electrical equipment can burn your skin or set your clothes on fire.\nNote: High voltages (over about 30V) are more dangerous because they have the power to push more current through you (skin's resistance drops at higher voltages), but it is the current that causes the actual damage. This is why static electricity is not dangerous to you, despite the high voltages. More current will flow if a larger area of your body is exposed.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

FUSES\nAn electrical device must be fitted with a fuse appropriate to its power output. A fuse blows if there is a problem with the electrical supply, breaking the circuit to the power source. Fuses come in different ratings, such as 3A, 5A, and 13A. A device's instructions will indicate what rating of fuse to use, but most computer equipment is rated at 3A or 5A. If the fuse fitted is rated too low, it will blow too easily; if the rating is too high, it may not blow when it should (it will allow too much current to pass through the device).\nIf multiple devices need to be attached to a single power point, a power strip of sockets should be used. If too many devices are attached to a single point, there is a risk that they will overheat and cause a fire. "Daisy-chaining" one power strip to another is dangerous. The total amperage of devices connected to the strip must not exceed the strip's maximum load (typically 12 amps).\ntag: C1 L1 TA

EQUIPMENT GROUNDING\nElectrical equipment must also be grounded (or earthed). If there is a fault that causes metal parts in the equipment to become live, a ground provides a path of least resistance for the electrical current to flow away harmlessly. Most computer products (PCs, printers, and so on) are connected to the building ground via the power plug. However, the large metal equipment racks often used to house servers and network equipment must also be grounded. Do not disconnect the ground wire. If it has to be removed, make sure it is replaced by a competent electrician.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_4.png)\nGrounding terminals and wires. (Image by phadventure © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TA FIGURE

HIGH VOLTAGE DEVICE SAFETY\nMost of the internal circuitry in a computer is low voltage (12 V or less) and low current, so there is not much of a threat to your personal safety. However, there are exceptions to this, and these exceptions can be very dangerous. Power supplies, CRT monitors,  the inverter card in an LCD display's fluorescent backlight, and laser printers can carry dangerously high levels of voltage. Charges held in capacitors can persist for hours after the power supply is turned off. You should not open these units unless you have been specifically trained to do so. Adhere to all printed warnings, and never remove or break open any safety devices that carry such a warning.\n\nNever insert anything into the power supply fan to get it to rotate. This approach does not work, and it is dangerous.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

ELECTRICAL FIRE SAFETY\nFaulty electrical equipment can pose a fire risk. If the equipment allows more current to flow through a cable than the cable is rated for, the cable will heat up. This could ignite flammable material close to the cable. If an electrical wire does start a fire, it is important to use the correct type of extinguisher to put it out. Many extinguishers use water or foam, which can be dangerous if used near live electrical equipment. The best type to use is a Carbon Dioxide (CO ) gas extinguisher. CO  extinguishers have a black label. Dry powder extinguishers can also be used, though these can damage electronic equitment.\n\nCaution: Care must be taken in confined spaces as the CO  plus smoke from the fire will quickly replace the available oxygen, making it hard to breathe.\n\nYou should also ensure that the electricity supply is turned off. This should happen automatically (the fuses for the circuit should trip), but make sure you know the location of the power master switches for a building.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

GUIDELINES FOR WORKING SAFELY WITH ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS\nConsider these guidelines as you prepare to work with electrical equipment.\nELECTRICAL SAFETY\nFollow these guidelines to work safely with electrical systems:\n• Do not work on electrical systems unless you have a good understanding of the risks and appropriate safety procedures.\n• Do not attempt repair work when you are tired; you may make careless mistakes, and your primary diagnostic tool, deductive reasoning, will not be operating at full capacity.\n• Do not assume anything without checking it out for yourself. A ground wire might have been disconnected or never properly installed, for example.\n• Disconnect the power to a circuit if you must handle it.\n• Hold down the power button on the device to ensure the circuits are drained of residual power.\n• Test live parts with a multimeter to ensure that no voltage is present.\n• Always use properly insulated tools and never grip a tool by its metal parts.\nNote: It is especially important not to touch the live parts of multimeter probes, as these may be connected to an energized circuit. Handle the probes by the insulated sheaths only.\n• Take care not to touch any part of a circuit with both hands to reduce the risk of a serious shock. This is called the "hand in pocket" rule. It reduces the chance that the current will pass through your chest and cause a heart attack.\n• Make sure your hands and the surrounding area are dry. Sweat can make your hands more conductive.\n• Do not leave any spill hazards in the vicinity and ensure you are not standing on a wet floor.\n• Do not wear jewelry, a wrist watch, or other items such as name badges that may dangle from your neck or wrist, as they can cause a short circuit or become trapped by moving parts.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY\nIn addition to electrical hazards, there are other environmental issues that computer technicians must deal with on a regular basis. The health and safety of you and those around you should always be your highest priority. Recognizing potential environmental hazards and properly dealing with them in a safe manner is a critical responsibility for a CompTIA® A+® technician.\n\nTrip hazards: A Trip hazard is caused by putting any object in pathways where people walk.\n\nLifting and carrying risks: Lifting a heavy object in the wrong way can damage your back or cause muscle strains and ligament damage. You may also drop the object and injure yourself or damage the object. Lifting and manual handling risks are not limited to particularly heavy objects. An object that is large or awkward to carry could cause you to trip over or walk into something else. An object that has sharp or rough edges or contains a hot or corrosive liquid could cause you to  cut or hurt yourself.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

TOXIC WASTE HANDLING\nThe conditions surrounding computer equipment can be an issue when there is a large number of airborne particles flowing in and around various devices. Contaminants can be either gaseous, such as ozone; particles, such as dust; or organic, which comes from industrial processing of fossil fuels or plastics. There is also a risk of poisonous or corrosive chemicals leaking from faulty equipment. Special care must be taken in respect of the following device types:\n• CRT monitors: A cathode ray tube (CRT) is an older type of computer monitor.\nThese are very heavy and bulky and can contain substantial amounts of hazardous handling and disposal materials, notably lead. They also contain a glass vacuum tube and high-voltage and environmental capacitors. While the tube is designed to be shatter resistant, it is still potentially very hazardous if dropped. The capacitors represent a high risk of electric shock.\n• Batteries: Swollen or leaking batteries from laptop computers or within cell phones and tablets must be handled very carefully and stored within appropriate containers. Use gloves and safety goggles to minimize any risk of burns from corrosive material.\nElectronic devices (PCs, cell phones, and tablets)\nMany components in electronic devices contain toxins and heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and arsenic. These toxins may be present in batteries, in circuit boards, and in plastics used in the case. These toxins are harmful to human health if ingested and damaging to the environment. This means that you must not dispose of electronic devices as general waste in landfill or incinerators. If an electronic device cannot be donated for reuse, it must be disposed of through an approved waste management and recycling facility.\n• Toner kits and cartridges: Photocopier and laser printer toner is an extremely fine powder. The products in toner powder are not classed as hazardous to health but any dust in substantial concentration is a nuisance as it may cause respiratory tract irritation.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

GUIDELINES FOR WORKING SAFELY AMONG ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS\nHere are some guidelines to help you work safely when environmental hazards are present.\nENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY\nFollow these guidelines to work safely among environmental hazards:\n• When installing equipment, ensure that cabling is secured, using cable ties or cable management products if necessary. Check that cables running under a desk cannot be kicked out by a user's feet. Do not run cabling across walkways or, if there is no option but to do so, use a cord protector to cover the cabling. • When servicing equipment, do not leave devices (PC cases for instance) in walkways or near the edge of a desk (where it could be knocked off). Be careful about putting down heavy or bulky equipment (ensure that it cannot topple).\n• When you need to lift or carry items, be aware of what your weight limitations are, as well as any restrictions and guidance set forth in your job description or site safety handbook. Weight limitations will vary depending on context. For example, a 50 pound limitation for lifting and carrying an object while holding it close to your body is not the same as lifting an object from a shelf above your head.\n• If necessary, you should obtain protective clothing (gloves and possibly goggles) for handling equipment and materials that can be hazardous.\n• Lift heavy objects safely. To do so:\n1. Plant your feet around the object with one foot slightly toward the direction in which you are going to move.\n2. Bend your knees to reach the object while keeping your back as straight as is possible and comfortable and your chin up.\n3. Find a firm grip on the object then lift smoothly by straightening your legs—do not jerk the object up.\n4. Carry the object while keeping your back straight.\n• Lower heavy objects safely, by reversing the lifting process; keep your chin up and bend at the knees. Take care not to trap your fingers or to lower the object onto your feet.\n• If you cannot lift an object because it is too awkward or heavy, then get help from a coworker, or use a cart to relocate the equipment. If you use a cart, make sure the equipment is tightly secured during transport. Do not stack loose items on a cart. If you need to carry an object for some distance, make sure that the route is unobstructed and that the pathway (including stairs or doorways) is wide and tall enough.\n• Follow these guidelines when working with toxic materials.\n• Never disassemble a CRT and never try to stack old units on top of one another.\n• Use gloves and safety goggles to minimize any risk of burns from corrosive materials from batteries, cell phones, and tablets.\n• Use an air filter mask that fits over your mouth and nose when servicing toner kits and cartridges to avoid breathing in the particles. People who suffer from asthma or bronchitis should avoid changing toner cartridges where possible. Loose toner must be collected carefully using an approved toner vacuum and sealed within a strong plastic waste container. Get the manufacturer's advice about disposing of loose toner safely. It must not be sent directly to a landfill.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

ESD\nStatic electricity is a high voltage (potential difference) stored in an insulated body.\nElectrostatic discharge (ESD) occurs when a path is created that allows electrons to rush from a statically charged body to another with an unequal charge. The electricity is released with a spark. The charge follows the path of least resistance, so it can occur between an electrical ground, such as a doorknob or a computer chassis, and a charged body, such as a human hand.\nAlthough the voltage is high, the amount of ESD current sustained is very low, so static electricity is not that harmful. It can, however, be slightly painful. You might have felt a small shock when reaching for a metal door handle for instance. You can feel a discharge of over about 2500V. A discharge of 20,000V or more could produce a visible spark. Walking over an untreated carpet in dry conditions could create a charge of around 35,000V.\nThe human body is mostly water and so does not generate or store static electricity very well. Unfortunately, our clothes are often made of synthetic materials, such as nylon and polyester, which act as good generators of static electricity and provide insulating layers that allow charges to accumulate. Humidity and climate also affect the likelihood of ESD. The risk increases during dry, cool conditions when humidity is low.\nIn humid conditions, such as before or during a storm, the residual charge can bleed into the environment before it can increase sufficiently to be harmful to electrical components.\nAn electronic component, such as a memory or logic chip, is composed of fine, conductive metal oxides deposited on a small piece of silicon. Its dimensions are measured in fractions of a micron (one millionth of a meter). Any static electricity discharged into this structure will flash-over (spark) between the conductive tracks, damaging or even vaporizing them. A transistor designed to work with 1-3V can be damaged by a charge of under 100V, though most have ESD protection circuits that improve this tolerance.\nA static discharge may make a chip completely unusable. If not, it is likely to fail at some later time. Damage occurring in this way can be hidden for many months and might only manifest itself in occasional failures.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

COMPONENT HANDLING\nBy eliminating unnecessary activities that create static charges and by removing unnecessary materials that are known charge generators, you can protect against ESD-Component Handling related damage and injuries. There are several other prevention techniques that you can use to protect yourself and equipment when you are working with computer components.\nSelf-grounding or manual dissipation of static buildup by touching a grounded Stress that while anti-object prior to touching any electronic equipment. You can accomplish this by touching an unpainted part of a metal computer chassis or other component.\n• Using an anti-ESD wrist strap or leg strap can dissipate static charges more effectively than self-grounding. The band should fit snugly around your wrist or ankle to maximize contact with the skin. Do not wear it over clothing. The strap ground is made either using a grounding plug that plugs into a wall socket or a crocodile clip that attaches to a grounded point or an unpainted part of the computer's metal chassis.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_9a.png)\nElectrostatic Discharge ESD wrist strap on ESD mat. (Image by Audrius Merfeldas © 123RF.com.)\n• An anti-ESD service mat is also useful. Sensitive components can be placed on the mat safely. The mats contain a snap that you connect to the wrist or leg strap. If the technician's clothing has the potential to produce static charges, an ESD smock, which covers from the waist up, can be helpful.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_9b.png)\nAn example of a basic electrostatic discharge (ESD) workstation. (Image © 123RF.com.)\n• Electronic components, assemblies, and spare parts, known as units (FRUs) are often shipped in antistatic bags  to protect them from ESD damage.\nANTISTATIC BAG TYPES\nAntistatic packaging includes either anti-ESD shielding or dissipative material.\n• Anti-ESD Shielding—this packaging reduces the risk of ESD because it is coated with a conductive material (such as a nickel compound). This material prevents static electricity from discharging through the inside of the bag. These bags are usually a shiny grey metallic color. To protect the contents of the bag fully, you should seal it, or at least fold the top over and seal that down.\n• Dissipative Packaging—this light pink or blue packaging reduces the build-up of static in the general vicinity of the contents by being slightly more conductive than normal. A plastic bag or foam packaging may be sprayed with an anti-static coating or have anti-static materials added to the plastic compound. This is used to package non-static-sensitive components packed in proximity to static-sensitive components.\ntag: C1 L1 TA FIGURE

GUIDELINES FOR PROTECTING COMPONENTS FROM ESD DAMAGE\nHere are some guidelines to help you protect your electronic components from ESD damage.\nESD PROTECTION\nFollow these guidelines to protect electronic components from damage due to ESD:\n• Use proper component handling and storage procedures whenever you are performing PC maintenance work.\n• To protect components and equipment from ESD damage:\n• Make sure that your body and clothing are drained of static electricity before starting work.\n• If possible, work in an uncarpeted area.\n• The simplest (but least effective) means of self-grounding is to touch an unpainted metal part of the PC, such as the power supply unit, before you handle a sensitive component. This is only a temporary solution and a static charge could build up again.\n\nCaution: Do not leave the PC plugged in if you open the case for servicing. Your safety is more important than the risk of damaging some PC components.\n• Where possible, handle vulnerable components by holding the edges of the plastic mounting card, and avoid touching the surfaces of the chips themselves.\n• Use ESD wrist or ankle straps and dissipative floor mats.\nNote: Ensure that the strap has a working current-limiting resistor for safety (straps should be tested daily). Do not use a grounding plug if there is any suspicion of a fault in the socket or in the building's electrical wiring, or if the wiring is not regularly inspected and tested.\ntag: C1 L1 TA

Activity 1-1\nImplementing an Anti-ESD Service Kit\nSCENARIO\nYou are assisting with introducing recently hired employees to the safety culture. You will need to demonstrate safe use of an anti-static kit and answer questions about safety procedures and hazards.\n\nQuestion 1. Describe the equipment you should use to prevent static electricity on your body from damaging the equipment on which you are working.\n\nAnswer 1. An anti-ESD service kit comprising an anti-ESD wrist strap, grounding cord and plug, and a conductive mat. The grounding plug should be connected to an earthed point.\n\nQuestion 2. Your instructor will provide you with an anti-static service kit. Prepare it for use and allow your instructor to check that you have connected everything correctly.\n\nQuestion 3. True or False? If you are using an anti-static floor mat, you do not need any other anti-ESD service equipment. Answer 3. False. A mat should be used with a wrist strap. You may also need ESD-safe packaging for storing components.\n\nQuestion 4. In which atmospheric conditions is the risk of ESD highest?\n\nAnswer 4. During cool, dry conditions when humidity is low. When humidity is high, the static electricity can dissipate through the moisture present in the air.\n\nQuestion 5. Electrical injuries include electrocution, shock, and collateral injury. Would you be injured if you are not part of the electrical ground current?\n\nAnswer 5. Yes, you could receive a thermal burn from the head of an electric arc or electric equipment. Your clothes can catch on fire, or your skin can be burned.\n\nQuestion 6. Which computer component presents the most danger from electrical shock?\n\nAnswer 6. System boards\n\nQuestion 7. What component helps to protect users of electrical equipment against a short circuit?\n\nAnswer 7. ESD wrist strap?\n\nQuestion 8. What care should you take when lifting a heavy object?\n\nAnswer 8.The main concern is damaging your back. Lift slowly using your legs for power not your back muscles.\n\nQuestion 9. What should you do before transporting a bulky object?\n\nAnswer 9. Check that there is a clear path to the destination point. If you cannot carry the object safely, get help or use a cart.\ntag: C1 L1 TA A1-1

Topic B: PC Components\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-3.5 Given a scenario, install and configure motherboards, CPUs, and add-on cards.\nIf you are not familiar with the various components that a computer is made up of, it can seem like a jigsaw puzzle. Like most puzzles, each part of a computer connects to other parts in a specific place, but generally, you will find that the pieces fit together almost exactly the same way from one system to another. To help you put the puzzle together, you need to understand what these pieces look like and what they do.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

SYSTEM CASE TYPES\nA desktop computer refers to a PC that is not designed to be used on the move. The components of a desktop computer system are divided between those that are designed to be handled by the user (peripheral devices) and those that would be damaged or dangerous if exposed. The system case or chassis is a plastic and metal box that houses this second class of components, such as the motherboard, Central Processing Unit (CPU), memory, adapter cards, disk drives, and power supply unit. System units are also often referred to as boxes, main units, or base units.\nThere are two basic types of system unit: Tower and Small Form Factor (SFF). These types are available in different sizes. Be aware that while a small case may be desirable because it takes up less space, it has less room inside for installing extra devices and is less effective at cooling.\nA tower case is designed to sit vertically on a surface, so that it is taller than it is wide.\nTower cases come in four basic sizes: full, mid, mini, and slim line.\n• Full tower cases are usually used for PC servers. These require the extra internal space for additional hard disks, adapter cards, and redundant power supply units.\n• Mid tower cases are used for high-end user PCs. These PCs do require extra devices and adapter cards, but not as many as a server.\n• Mini tower cases are usually used for office or home PCs where the requirement for additional internal devices and adapter cards is limited.\n• Slimline cases require low-profile adapter cards but can be oriented horizontally or vertically.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_14a.png)\nComputer tower with main panel removed showing an attached motherboard and areas for optional disc drives, 3.5" drive bays, and a power supply bay. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nSmall Form Factor (SFF) case designs are semi-portable, space-saving designs typically used for domestic entertainment or Media Center systems that will not look out of place in a living room. They are usually cube-like or super slimline. SFF cases can hold only a limited number of components.\nDesktop computers can also be purchased as all-in-one units. All-in-one means that all the computer components, except the keyboard and mouse, are contained within the monitor case.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_14b.png)\nAll-in-one PC. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

PARTS OF THE SYSTEM CASE\nTo perform PC maintenance and component upgrades, you must understand how to open a desktop computer's case.\n• Each case has a cover, which is removed by either undoing the screws at the back or pressing together clips that release it. Cases based on the slimline design have a hinged cover that releases to allow access to the motherboard.\n• The front panel provides access to the removable media drives, a power on/off switch, a reset switch, and LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes) to indicate drive operation. The front cover can be removed but may require the side panel to be removed first in order to access the screws or clips that secure it.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_15.png)\nFront of case. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nNote: Some cases feature tool-free access (that is, they are secured by clips). Some cases use proprietary screw fittings to prevent unauthorized access to the internal components.\n• The rear panel has cut-out slots aligned with the position of adapter card slots. These slots should either be covered by an adapter card or a metal strip known as a blanking plate. Uncovered slots can disrupt the proper flow of air around components in the PC and cause overheating and also increase the amount of dust in the system. There is also a cut-out aligned with the motherboard's Input/Output (I/O) ports.\nThese allow for the connection of peripheral devices.\nThe rear panel provides access to the Power Supply Unit (PSU) sockets. The PSU has an integral fan exhaust. Care should be taken that it is not obstructed, as this will adversely affect cooling. There may be an additional case fan.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_16.png)\nRear of case. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

REPAIR OR REPLACE?\nPC components that are easily user-replaceable (or upgradeable) are referred to as field replaceable units (FRUs). Due to economic factors, most components of a PC are not worth repairing; instead they are simply replaced with a new unit ("swapped out").\ntag: C1 L1 TB

GUIDELINES FOR PC DISASSEMBLY\nHere are some guidelines for disassembling PCs.\nPC DISASSEMBLY\nBefore you start to disassemble a PC, consider the following guidelines:\n• Back up all data stored on the internal drive(s) to protect important data.\n• Create a clean work environment with plenty of working space where you can set the PC at a comfortable height.\n• Gather all necessary tools and equipment. A notepad and pen may be useful for making diagrams and notes. A digital camera is also useful for recording the layout of components.\n• Make sure that all devices are powered off and unplugged from the building power before disconnecting them.\n• Take anti-static precautions to minimize the chance of damaging sensitive components. Place static-sensitive components, such as processors and memory, in anti-static bags.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

MOTHERBOARDS\nA printed circuit board, variously called the motherboard, mobo, system board, or main board, houses the processor, chipset, memory, and expansion slots. The type of motherboard influences system speed and upgrade capabilities. There are many motherboard manufacturers, including AOpen (Acer), ASRock, ASUSTek, Biostar, EVGA Corporation, Gigabyte, Intel, MSI, Shuttle, Tyan, and Via.\n\nThe motherboard is attached to the case by using standoffs. These hold the motherboard firmly and ensure no other part of it touches the case. The standoffs are to identify the parts of positioned in holes that line up in the same position in the case and the motherboard (as long as they use compatible form factors). Standoffs are either brass ones secured by screws or plastic ones that snap into place.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

MOTHERBOARD FORM FACTORS\nThe form factor of the motherboard describes its shape, layout, and the type of case and power supply that can be used. Two motherboards may have exactly the same functionality but different form factors; the difference is the layout of the components on the motherboard.\nThe following table describes common motherboard form factors.\n\nATX:\n• The Advanced Technology Extended (ATX) specification was developed by Intel in 1995 to provide a new design for PC motherboards, updating the previous AT form factor.\n• Full size ATX boards are 12 inches wide by 9.6 inches deep (or 305 x 244 mm).\n• ATX boards can contain up to seven expansion slots.\n\nMicro-ATX:\n• The Micro-ATX (mATX) standard specifies a 9.6-inch (244 x 244 mm) square board.\n• mATX boards have fewer expansion slots than ATX boards (up to 4 compared to a maximum of 7 for full-sized ATX boards). Note: Most mATX boards can be mounted in ATX cases.\n\nMini-ITX:\n• Small Form Factor (SFF) PCs are becoming popular as home machines (and in image-conscious offices). SFF PCs often use Via's Mini-ITX form factor.\n• Mini-ITX is 6.7 inches (170 x 170 mm) square with one expansion slot.\nNote: Most mini-ITX boards can be mounted in ATX cases.\n\nOther ITX-based form factors:\nThere are also smaller nano-, pico-, and mobile-ITX form factors factors, but these are used for embedded systems and portables, rather than PCs.\nNote: No commercial motherboards were ever produced from the original plain ITX specification.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

MOTHERBOARD CONNECTOR TYPES\nAll motherboards have connectors for the same sort of components: CPU, memory, disk drives, peripherals, and so on. However, the type and number of these connectors depends upon the motherboard model.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_18.png)\nMotherboard connectors. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

CPU SOCKETS\nNew motherboards are generally released to support new CPU designs. Most PC CPUs are manufactured by Intel and AMD, and these vendors use different socket designs. Also, because technology changes rapidly, a given motherboard will only support a limited number of CPU models. CPU models are closely tied to the chipset and memory subsystem. This means that there is less scope for upgrading the CPU than used to be the case. You could not, for instance, take a motherboard designed for the Core 2 CPU and plug an AMD Phenom CPU into it. Both the physical interface (socket) and system architecture have diverged along proprietary lines since the old socket 7 interface.\nThe CPU is typically inserted into a squarish socket, located close to the memory sockets, and then covered by a heatsink and fan.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_19.png)\nMotherboard CPU socket and heatsinks. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

MEMORY SLOTS\nAll the software and data processed by a computer is ultimately stored as binary code; strings of ones and zeroes. This program code is stored in system memory. System memory uses a type of memory technology called (RAM).  Program code is loaded into RAM  so that it can be accessed and executed by the processor. RAM also holds data, such as the contents of a spreadsheet or document, while it is being modified. System RAM is volatile; it loses its contents when power is removed.\nSystem RAM is normally packaged as Dual Inline Memory Modules (DIMMs) fitted to motherboard slots. DIMM slots have catches at either end, are located close to the CPU socket, and are often color-coded. Note that there are various RAM technologies (DDR3 versus DDR4, for instance) and the DIMMs are specific to a particular DDR version. A label next to the slots should identify the type of DIMMs supported.\nThe capabilities of the memory controller and number of physical slots determine how much memory can be fitted.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_20.png)\nMotherboard DIMM system memory slots. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

CHIPSET AND MEMORY ARCHITECTURE\nThe chipset consists of several controllers that handle the transfer of data between the CPU and various devices. Examples of controllers include the following:\n• System memory controller.\n• Input/Output (I/O) controller to handle disk drives and expansion buses.\n• Controllers for any integrated video, sound, and network (cabled and wireless) interfaces.\nNote: Intel and AMD manufacture all the CPUs used in PCs, but there are various chipset vendors. Some of the major names include ATI (now owned by AMD), NVIDIA, SiS, ULi, and VIA. The chipset is soldered onto the motherboard and cannot be upgraded. The type of chipset on the motherboard can affect the choice of processor and multiprocessing support, type and amount of system memory supported, and type(s) of system bus supported.\nThe link between the CPU and system memory is a key factor in determining system performance. Historically, PCs used a chipset split into two sections: the northbridge and the southbridge. The main function of the northbridge is as the system memory controller, connecting the processor to RAM. The southbridge is designed to control all of the I/O functions not handled by the northbridge. These are older, slower technologies, such as USB. As memory, video, and fixed disk technologies improved, the northbridge/southbridge architecture became a bottleneck to performance. Newer CPUs and chipsets use different designs, with Intel and AMD both introducing different architectures. The general trend is for subsystems that require a lot of bandwidth—notably the system memory controller and graphics controller—to be incorporated on the same chip as the CPU itself (referred to as "on die").\ntag: C1 L1 TB

CMOS AND RTC BATTERIES\nOn older computers, CMOS RAM stored the PC's basic configuration and any settings made via the CMOS/system firmware setup program. CMOS stands for Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor, which describes the manufacturing process used to make the RAM chip.\nCMOS devices require very little power to operate and use a small battery to maintain their settings. The CMOS battery is a coin cell lithium battery. These batteries typically last for 5-10 years.\nOn current motherboards, configuration data is stored in a Non-Volatile RAM (NVRAM) chip such as flash memory, rather than in CMOS RAM. Flash memory does not require Real Time Clock (RTC) battery-backup. A CMOS battery is still used to power the Real Time Clock, however, and may be referred to as the RTC battery or clock battery. The RTC keeps track of the actual date and time.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_21.png)\nRTC coin cell on the Motherboard. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

BUS ARCHITECTURE\nComputers transmit data using electrical signals and process and store it using components called transistors and capacitors. An electrical pathway on the motherboard or through cabling that carries the signals is referred to as a bus. Physically, a bus is implemented on the motherboard as tiny wires (called traces) running between components. The bus carries information being processed by the computer (data) and information about where the data is located in memory (address).\nThe bus also carries power to a component and the timing signals that synchronize data transfers between components. The term "bus architecture" usually means an expansion bus, used to connect peripheral devices. However, a variety of buses exist within a PC. Also, the way that bus designs are implemented has changed considerably as PC technology has developed and improved.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL BUSES\nOne way of categorizing types of buses is to divide them into internal and external. An internal bus, or expansion bus, connects core components, such as the CPU, memory, and the system controllers.\nAn external bus, or expansion bus, allows additional components to be connected to the computer. These components could be peripheral devices (located outside the case) or adapter cards (located inside the case). External bus technologies do not necessarily extend outside the computer case. For example, PCI, the most popular expansion bus standard, provides connections to internal adapter cards only. A genuinely external bus (like SCSI, USB, or Firewire) extends the bus wires outside the computer case using cabling. The distinction between internal and external bus types has also become a lot less clear as one bus technology will be used to perform both types of role (for example, PCI Express).\ntag: C1 L1 TB

EXPANSION SLOTS\nExpansion slots enable you to install plug-in adapter cards in a computer to extend the range of functions it can perform. There are several expansion bus types and many different types of adapter card. Computers can support more than one expansion bus. PCs use a multi-bus design, to support older technologies and allow for upgrades. For example, a PC might support PCI and PCI Express for adding internal adapter cards plus USB to allow the connection of peripherals.\n\nRISER CARDS\nSome PC case designs are slimline, meaning that there is not enough space for full height expansion cards. This problem is addressed by providing a riser card at right angles to the main board, enabling you to connect additional adapters to the system in an orientation that is parallel to the motherboard and thus save space within the system case.\n\nNote: Another option is to use low profile adapter cards. A low profile card is about half the height of a standard card and so fits within a slimline case.\n\nHistorically, the LPX and NLX form factors were designed as riser architectures. Most manufacturers just use the ATX riser card specification. This specifies a 2x11 connector plus a PCI connector for the riser card.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_23.png)\nA riser card. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nNote: Daughter board is a general computing and electronics term for any circuit board that plugs into another circuit board. In personal computing, a daughter board can be used as a more general term for adapter cards. Sometimes, in casual usage, the term is used interchangeably with the term riser card, but technically they are not the same.\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

SYSTEM CLOCK AND BUS SPEED\nThe system clock synchronizes the operation of all parts of the PC and provides the basic timing signal for the CPU. Clock speeds are measured in Megahertz (MHz) or Gigahertz (GHz). The clock consists of a clock generator that sets up a timing signal and clock multipliers that take the timing signal produced by the generator and apply a multiplication factor to produce different timing signals for different types of buses. This means that one type of bus can work at a different speed (or frequency) to another type of bus.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

PCI BUS\nThe Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) bus was introduced in 1994 with the Pentium processor. It is still an important technology in terms of adapter card provision, though it is being superseded by PCI Express. Several versions of PCI have been released subsequently to the first commercial version (2.0). Information about PCI standards is published at pcisig.org. The different capabilities are summarized here.\n\nBUS WIDTH AND CLOCK SPEED\n• PCI supports up to 5 devices (though each device can have up to 8 different functions) and allocates system resources by using Plug-and-Play. Bandwidth on the PCI bus is shared between all devices. PCI supports bus mastering, meaning that the device can control the bus to transfer data to and from memory, without requiring the CPU. The PCI architecture is a 32-bit-wide parallel bus working at 33.3 MHz, achieving a transfer rate of up to 133 MBps (that is, 32 bits divided by 8 to get 4 bytes, then multiplied by the clock rate of 33.3).\n• Later versions allowed for 66 MHz operation (giving a 32-bit bus 266 MBps bandwidth) and a 64-bit wide bus (266 MBps at 33.3 MHz or 533 MBps at 66 MHz). 64-bit and 66 MHz cards and buses are not commonly found on desktop PCs, however.\n\nADAPTER CARD AND SLOT FORM FACTORS\nOriginally, PCI cards were designed for 5V signaling, but the PCI 2.1 specification also allows for 3.3V and dual voltage cards. In order to prevent the wrong type of PCI card from being inserted (for example, a 3.3V card in a 5V PCI slot), the keying for the three types of cards is different.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_24.png)\nPCI card and slot form factors. The exact number of pins is not shown in this image. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nOn a 5V card and slot, the key is at pins 50-51; on a 3.3V adapter, the key is at pins 12-13.\n64-bit compatible slots and adapters have an extra 60 pins, making the slots distinctively longer. A 32-bit card can be inserted into a 64-bit slot (as long as it is not a 5V card).\n\nNote: PCI 2.3 deprecates the use of 5V cards and most cards are universal. The vast majority of cards and slots for desktop systems are 32-bit. 64-bit PCI is more a feature of server-level systems.\n\nRegardless of the voltage used for signaling, PCI slots can deliver up to 25W of power to an adapter. A dual voltage (universal) adapter has both keys.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_25.png)\n32-bit PCI card with dual voltage. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

PCI EXPRESS BUS\nAs CPU and memory bus speeds increased over the years, PCI represented a substantial bottleneck to computer performance. PCI is a parallel interface. Parallel interface speeds are limited by the problem of timing each signal (data skew). They are also more complex and costly to implement. Another performance barrier is the fact that the bandwidth of the PCI bus is shared between all the components connected to it, and only one component can make use of the bus at any one time. This is a particular problem for video, disk access, and networking. Various fixes were implemented to remove critical bottlenecks. These fixes added to the complexity of chip design, and over time the PCI bus simply became inadequate. PCI Express (PCIe) was released by Intel in 2004 as the replacement for the PCI architecture. PCIe uses point-to-point serial communications, meaning that each component can have a dedicated link to any other component. Connections are made via a switch, which routes data between components and can provide Quality of Service (QoS) to any component that needs it (for example, to prioritize real-time video over non-time critical data).\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_26.png)\nMotherboard PCI card and PCI Express expansion slots. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nEach point-to-point connection is referred to as a link. The link sends both data and control/timing instructions. A link can make use of one or more lanes. Each lane consists of two wire pairs (four wires in total) using low voltage differential signaling. One pair is used to transmit and the other to receive (bi-directional).\n• A given component can support a specific number of lanes (usually x1, x4, x8, or x16), and the switch negotiates the maximum possible number of lanes to use (for example, x8 and x16 devices would use 8 lanes). Each lane supports a transfer rate of 250 MBps in each direction. Most graphics cards use x16 links (4 GBps in each direction).\n• A card will fit in any port with an equal or greater number of lanes. For example, a x8 card will fit in a x8 or x16 socket (up-plugging) and work at x8, but it will not fit in a x1 or x4 slot (down-plugging). x4, x8, and x16 slots are physically the same length but parts of the slot will be blanked out for x4 and x8. PCIe is software compatible with PCI, meaning that PCI ports can be included on a motherboard (to support legacy adapter cards) but PCI cards cannot be fitted into PCIe into PCIe sockets.\nPCIe can supply up to 75W to a device via the motherboard slot. An extra 75W power can be supplied via a PCIe power connector. PCIe also features power management functions and support for hot swappable and hot pluggable adapters.\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

PCIe VERSIONS\nThe original PCIe standard has been subject to several version updates. PCI Express 2 compatible motherboards and adapters support transfer rates of 500 MBps per lane. Version 2.0 motherboards and adapters are interchangeable with earlier version 1.1 devices, though the added performance benefits are realized only if both components support version 2.  PCIe 2.1 specifies a power draw from the slot of up to 150W and an 8-pin auxiliary power connector delivering another 150W. This change introduced potential compatibility problems with v1.0 devices but these can often be fixed via a firmware update.\nPCIe 3 further increases transfer rates to around 1 GBps per lane while maintaining backward-compatibility. The PCIe 4 standard doubles transfer rates again, to roughly 2 GBps per lane, whereas PCIe 5, while still being finalized at the time of writing, will almost double it again (to nearly 4 GBps per lane).\n\nNote: You will also see the term GigaTransfers per second (GT/s) used to describe PCIe speeds. These values do not exclude the bits transmitted as signaling and encoding overhead.\ntag: C1 L1 TB

STORAGE BUS (SATA AND IDE)\nA storage bus is a special type of expansion bus dedicated to communicating with storage devices, such as hard disks, solid state drives, and optical drives (CD/DVD/Blu-Storage Bus (SATA and ray). Host Bus Adapters (HBAs) provide a connection point for internal mass storage devices, such as hard drives, optical drives, and tape drives. There used to be two main bus standards for attaching internal storage devices to a PC: Parallel ATA (PATA), which is also known as Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE) or Enhanced IDE (EIDE), and Small Computer System Interface (SCSI).\nBoth IDE and SCSI used parallel transfers of data per clock signal to improve bandwidth. As circuitry and encoding methods have improved, these parallel transmission technologies have been superseded by faster serial bus types.\nConsequently, IDE and SCSI have now largely been replaced by SATA (Serial ATA).\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_27.png)\nMotherboard SATA card and legacy PATA/IDE ports. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nA SATA port accepts a compact 7-pin connector and can be used to attach a single device. Most full size motherboards have 4 built-in SATA ports.\n\nNote: What is called IDE today is technically Enhanced IDE (EIDE). Original IDE specifications were published even further in the past.\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

OTHER MOTHERBOARD CONNECTORS\nIn addition to slots and sockets for the major components, motherboards also include connectors for things like case buttons and fans.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_28.png)\nMotherboard front panel USB and audio headers. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nThese connector types are described in the following table.\nInternal USB connectors: A computer will normally feature one or two front USB ports to connect peripherals, as well as more on the back. Internal USB connections are made via 9-pin headers, which accept up to two 4-pin port connections (the 9th pin is to orient the cable correctly).\nFront panel connectors: Components on the front panel of the case connect to headers on the motherboard. Typically, front panel connectors can include:\n• Power button (soft power): On modern computers, the power button sends a signal to the PC that can be interpreted by the OS (as a command to shut down for instance) rather than actually switching the PC off. Holding down the power button for a few seconds will cut the power, however.\n• Drive (HDD) activity lights: These show when an internal hard disk is being accessed.\n• Audio ports: These allow headphones and a microphone to be connected to the computer.\nWhen disassembling the system, you should make a diagram of how these connectors are plugged in (position and orientation). If you do not have a diagram, you will have to refer to the motherboard documentation or go by any labels printed on the wires and headers. These are not always very easy to follow, however, which is why you should always make a diagram (or take a digital photo) to refer to.\nPower and fan connectors: The motherboard also contains various connection points for the power supply and fans.\n• The power connector is usually a 24-pin white or black block.\n• Fan connectors are smaller. There will be one for the CPU and one or more for the case fans.\nThere is no current standard that dictates the size and form factor of fan connectors. Common connectors include:\n• A 3-pin Molex KK connector, commonly used to connect a fan directly to the motherboard.\n• A 4-pin Molex KK connector that is similar in function to the 3-pin KK connector, except that it has an extra pin to provide the ability to control the speed of the fan.\n• A 4-pin Molex connector that connects directly to the system's power supply.\n\nNote: In some systems, the system firmware monitors the fan speed. In order for this to happen, the power supply requires an external fan connector that is attached to the motherboard. The fan does not draw power from the connector; it only is used to provide information to the system firmware. Based on the information received, the system can increase the fan speed for improved cooling or decrease the fan speed when less cooling is needed so that the system operates more quietly.\n\n\nJUMPER SETTINGS\nWhen upgrading components such as the CPU, you may have to change the position of jumpers on the motherboard. A jumper is a small plastic clip containing a metal conductor that fits over two contacts on the motherboard. The position of the clip completes a circuit that configures the motherboard in one way or another.\n\nNote: There may be a motherboard reset jumper. Setting this may allow you to restore the system from a failed firmware update, forgotten system supervisor password, and so on.\ntag: C1 L1 TB FIGURE

Activity 1-2\nDiscussing PC Components\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\nQuestion 1. Describe how you would open a PC case to access the motherboard.\n\nAnswer 1. Power down the PC and remove the power cable. With the power cable removed, hold the power button down for a few seconds to ensure PC is completely de-engergized. Then, remove any screws holding the case cover in place, and slide the cover out from the retaining clips. This should expose the motherboard. You would usually need to remove other panels only to access storage devices.\n\nQuestion 2. At the rear of a system case are slots for adapter card ports. Why should these be covered with blanking plates if not in use?\n\nAnswer 2. The fan system is designed to draw cool air across the motherboard and blow out warm air. Large holes in the chassis disrupt this air flow. Also dust will be able to settle on the system components more easily.\n\nQuestion 3. You have been servicing a computer but when you have finished you find that it will not turn on. There was no power problem before and you have verified that the computer is connected to a working electrical outlet.\nWhat is the most likely explanation?\n\nAnswer 3. The cable connecting the power button to the motherboard could have been disconnected and either not reconnected or not properly reconnected.\n\nQuestion 4. What is the main function of the chipset?\n\nAnswer 4. Provides controllers for the CPU to interface with other components (memory and expansion bus for instance) and adapters to provide functions such as video and audio, and Ethernet and wireless networking on the motherboard.\n\nQuestion 5. True or false? The Real Time Clock controls the timing of signals between the CPU and other components.\n\nAnswer 5. False. The system clock controls timing; the Real Time Clock keeps track of the calendar date and time.\n\nQuestion 6. What type of socket is used to install system memory?\n\nAnswer 6. Dual Inline Memory Module (DIMM).\n\nQuestion 7. You have a x8 PCIe storage adapter card—can you fit this in a x16 slot?\n\nAnswer 7. Yes—this is referred to as up-plugging. On some motherboards it may only function as a x1 device though.\n\nQuestion 8. What is the bandwidth of a PCIe v2.0 x16 graphics adapter?\n\nAnswer 8. 8 GBps in each direction (full duplex). PCIe v2 supports 500 MBps per lane.\n\nQuestion 9. You also need to help new hires identify the different types of motherboards used in computers deployed throughout the company.\nWhat type of motherboard is displayed here, and what characteristics did you use to help you identify the board type?\n\nAnswer 9. Based on its small size dimensions and compact component design, this motherboard is a mini-ITX.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_32.png)\n\nQuestion 10. What type of motherboard is displayed here, and what characteristics did you use to help you identify the board type?\n\nAnswer 10. You can tell by the large size and large number of available components and slots that this motherboard is an ATX.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_33.png)\ntag: C1 L1 TB A1-2 FIGURE

Topic C: Common Connection Interfaces\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-3.1 Explain basic cable types, features, and their purposes.\n1001-3.2 Identify common connector types.\n1001-3.5 Given a scenario, install and configure motherboards, CPUs, and add-on cards.\nYou need to be able to identify how components are connected together to form a complete computer system. In this topic, you will compare PC and device connection interfaces and their characteristics.\nA PC is made up of many different components. All of these components need to be able to communicate with each other so that the computer can function properly. As PC designs have evolved over the years, several connection technologies have been implemented to provide communication among computer components. As a computer technician, identifying the methods used to connect devices to a computer will enable you to install, upgrade, and replace PC components quickly and effectively.\ntag: C1 L1 TC

INTERFACES, PORTS, AND CONNECTIONS\nSome people might use the terms interface, port, and connection interchangeably, but there are some differences among the three.\n\nINTERFACE\nAn interface is the point at which two devices connect and communicate with each other.\n\nPORT\nA port is a hardware interface that you can use to connect devices to a computer. The port can also be referred to as an endpoint.\n• The port transfers electronic signals between the device and the system unit.\n• A port is either an electrically wired socket or plug, or it can be a wireless transmission device.\n• Ports can vary by shape, by color, by the number and layout of the pins or connectors contained within the port, by the signals the port carries, and by the port's location.\n• Ports exist for both internal and external devices. External ports often have a graphical representation of the type of device that should be connected to it, such as a small picture of a monitor adjacent to the video port.\n\nCONNECTIONS\nComputer connections are the physical access points that enable a computer to communicate with internal or external devices. They include the ports on both the computer and the connected devices, plus a transmission medium, which is either a cable with connectors at each end or a wireless technology. Personal computer connections can be categorized by the technology or standard that was used to develop the device.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_35.png)\nA computer connection between an external USB hard drive and a desktop computer. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nPorts are often described as being male, meaning they have pin connectors, or female, meaning they have hole connectors. This gender orientation means that it is virtually impossible to connect them incorrectly. Many connectors and ports are also keyed to prevent them from being inserted the wrong way around.\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

I/O PORTS AND CABLES
Input and output (I/O) ports allow additional devices to be connected to the PC. Some ports are designed for a particular type of device (such as a graphics port). Other ports (such as USB) support different device types.
External ports are positioned at the rear or front of the PC through cut-outs in the case. They can be provided on the motherboard or with an expansion card.
(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_36.png)\nI/O ports on a motherboard. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

USB CONNECTORS\nThe Universal Serial Bus (USB) has become the standard means of connecting peripheral devices to a computer. It is an example of a multipurpose cable that can be used to attach a wide range of peripherals and storage devices.\n\nNote: USB has not historically been used as a display interface (to attach a monitor).\nThat is changing as the USB-C connector (discussed later) is becoming more widely adopted.\n\nA USB bus consists of a host controller and up to 127 devices.\n\nNote: To overcome the limitations of sharing bandwidth, most PC chipsets feature multiple USB controllers, each of which has only three or four ports.\n\nA device can be a hub (providing ports for additional devices) or function. Functions are divided into classes, such as human interface (keyboards and mice), mass storage (disk drives), printer, audio device, and so on.\n\nUSB STANDARDS\nThere have been several iterations of the USB standard. Each new version introduces better data rates. A version update may also define new connector form factors and other improvements. The USB 2.0 (HighSpeed) standard specifies a data rate of 480 Mbps. Note that this bandwidth is shared between all devices attached to the same host.\n\nThe USB 3.0 standard introduces a SuperSpeed mode . SuperSpeed improves the bus bandwidth tenfold (to 5 Gbps or 5000 Mbps) and makes the link full duplex, so a device can send and receive at up to 5 Gbps simultaneously. USB 3.1 defines a mode with a data rate of 10 Gbps. USB 3.2 promises 20 Gbps, but only over USB-C ports and cabling (discussed later).\n\nNote: USB 3 controllers actually feature two sub-controllers. One controller handles SuperSpeed-capable devices while the other supports legacy HighSpeed, FullSpeed, and LowSpeed USB v1.1 and v2.0 devices. Consequently legacy devices will not slow down SuperSpeed-capable devices. There are changes to the way the bus works to try to improve "real-world" bandwidth too.\nUSB 3.x receptacles and connectors often have a blue connector tab or housing to distinguish them.\n\nUSB POWER\nPower is supplied by the host at 5V and a single device may draw up to 500 mA (milli-amps) or 2.5 W (increased to 4.5 W with the USB 3.0 specification). Devices that require more power than this, such as printers, must be connected to an external power supply.\n\nNote: Devices supporting fast charging can supply 7.5 W if the port is in charging mode (no data transfer is possible in charging mode). Devices conforming to the USB Power Delivery version 2.0 specification are able to deliver up to 100 W of power.\n\nUSB ON THE GO (OTG)\nUSB On the Go (OTG)allows a port to function either as a host or as a device. For example, a port on a smartphone might operate as a device when connected to a PC but as a host when connected to a keyboard.\n\nUSB CONNECTORS AND PORTS\nUSB connectors are always inserted with the USB symbol facing up. There have been several versions of the USB standard and these versions have often introduced new connector form factors.\nThe main connectors for USB 2.0 are:\n• Type A (4-pin)—for connection to the host. The connector and port are shaped like flat rectangles.\n• Type B (4-pin)—for connection to a device. The connector and port are square, with a beveled top. There are also small form factor versions of the type B connector and port:\n• Type B Mini (5-pin)—a smaller connector for connection to a device. This type of connector was seen on early digital cameras but is no longer widely used. The additional pin supports USB OTG.\nNote: There were also a number of non-standard mini B connectors used on various digital camera models.\n• Type B Micro (5-pin)—an updated connector for smaller devices, such as smartphones and tablets. The micro connector is distinctively flatter than the older mini type connector.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_38a.png)\nUSB 2.0 ports and connectors. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nA USB cable can feature Type A to Type A connectors but most convert from one type to another (Type A to Type B or Type A to Micro Type B for instance). In USB 3.0, there are 9-pin versions of the Type A, Type B, and Type B Micro connectors. USB 3.0 Type A connections are physically compatible with USB 1.1 and 2.0 connections, but the Type B/Type B Micro connections are not. So, for example, you could plug a USB 2.0 Type A cable into a USB 3.0 port, but you could not plug a USB 3.0 Type B cable into a USB 2.0 Type B port.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_38b.png)\nUSB 3.0 and 3.1 connectors and ports (from left to right): Type A, Type B, Miro Type B, Type C. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nAs you can see, USB has historically featured a bewildering range of connector types. USB 3.1 defines a new USB-C 24-pin connector type. This should provide a single consistent hardware interface for the standard. The connector is reversible, meaning it can be inserted either way up. The connector design is also more secure and robust. USB-C can use the same type of connector at both ends or you can obtain USB-C to USB Type A or Type B converter cables.\n\nCABLE LENGTH\nThe maximum cable length for LowSpeed devices is 3m while for FullSpeed and HighSpeed the limit is 5m. Vendors may provide longer cables however. SuperSpeed capable cables do not have an official maximum length but up to about 3m is recommended.\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

OTHER PERIPHERAL CONNECTOR TYPES\nUSB is the dominant interface for PC peripherals, but you may also come across cabled devices requiring different connections.\n\nTHUNDERBOLT (TB)\nThe Thunderbolt (TB) interface was developed by Intel and is primarily used on Apple workstations and laptops. Thunderbolt can be used as a display interface (like DisplayPort or HDMI) and as a general peripheral interface (like USB). In its first two versions, Thunderbolt uses the same physical interface as MiniDP and is compatible with DisplayPort, so that displays with a MiniDP port can be connected to a host via Thunderbolt. Thunderbolt ports are distinguished from MiniDP by a lightning bolt icon.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_39.png)\nThe USB-C form factor adapted for Thunderbolt 3. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nVersion 2 of the standard supports links of up to 20 Gbps. Up to six devices can be connected to a single port by daisy-chaining the devices. You can also use a dock or hub device to channel a variety of ports (TB, USB, HDMI, and Ethernet, for instance) via a single Thunderbolt port on the host PC or laptop.\nThunderbolt version 3 changes the physical interface to use the same port, connector, and cabling as USB-C. Converter cables are available to connect Thunderbolt 1 or 2 devices to Thunderbolt 3 ports. A USB device plugged into a Thunderbolt 3 port will function normally but Thunderbolt devices will not work if connected to a USB port that is not Thunderbolt-enabled. Thunderbolt 3 supports up to 40 Gbps over a short, high-quality cable (up to 0.5m/1.6ft).\n\nLIGHTNING\nLightning Apple's iPhone and iPad mobile devices use a proprietary 8-pin port and connector.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_40a.png)\nApple Lightening connector and port. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nThe Lightning connector is reversible (can be inserted either way up). The Lightning port is found only on Apple's mobile devices. To connect such a device to a PC, you need a suitable adapter cable, such as Lightning-to-USB A or Lightning-to-USB C.\n\nSERIAL PORTS (RS-232 AND DB-9)\nThe serial port (or RS-232) is so-called because data is transmitted over one wire one bit at a time. Start, stop, and parity bits are used to format and verify data transmission. While modern interfaces like USB are also serial, an RS-232 interface uses much less sophisticated signaling methods. Consequently, an RS-232 serial port supports data rates up to about 115 Kbps only.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_40b.png)\n9-pin serial connector and port. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nSerial ports are generally associated with connecting external modems, used to establish dial-up Internet connections, though even this function has largely been superseded by USB. You may also come across serial ports on network equipment, where a serial connection can be used to manage the device.\nRS-232 (Recommended Standard #232) specifies a 25-pin hardware interface, but in practice, PC manufacturers used the cheaper 9-pin D-shell (DB-9) male port shown  above.\nIn Windows, the serial port is referred to as a Communications (COM) port.\n\nNote: You might also come across the term PS/2. This was a serial interface used to attach mice and keyboards. PS/2 ports use a 6-pin mini-DIN format.\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

STORAGE CONNECTOR TYPES\nUSB and Thunderbolt are examples of multipurpose cables used to attach different kinds of external peripheral device (though it is also possible to use USB cabling within the system case). Internal storage devices use different types of interface, though.\n\n• SATA and eSATA connectors\nSerial Advanced Technology Attachment (SATA) is the standard means of attaching internal  storage drives to a desktop PC. Each SATA host adapter port supports a single device. Internal SATA cables can be up to 1 m (39"). The cables are terminated with compact 7-pin connectors.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_41.png)\nSATA data and power ports on a hard drive. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nThere is also an eSATA standard for the attachment of external drives, with a 2 m (78") cable. You must use an eSATA cable to connect to an external eSATA port; you cannot use an internal SATA cable. eSATAp  is a non-standard powered port used by some vendors that is compatible with both USB and SATA (with an eSATAp cable).\nThe USB interface dominates the external drive market, however.\nNote: The main drawback of eSATA compared to USB or Thunderbolt external drives is that power is not supplied over the cable. This is not so much of an issue for 3.5" drives, which require a separate power supply anyways, but it limits the usefulness of eSATA for 2.5" portable drives.\n\n• SCSI\nModern connection interfaces use serial communications. These serial links can achieve Mbps and Gbps speeds because of improved signaling and encoding methods. Back when serial interfaces were much slower, PC vendors used parallel data transmission to support better transfer rates. While a serial interface essentially transfers 1 bit at a time, a parallel interface transfers 8 bits (1 byte) or more. This requires more wires in the cable and more pins in the connectors, meaning parallel interfaces are very bulky.\nInternal PC storage devices often used Parallel ATA (PATA)/Enhanced Integrated Drive Electronics (EIDE) connections. This supported transfer rates up to about 133 MBps. Workstations and servers requiring more speed would use the Computer Systems Interface (SCSI) bus instead. SCSI could support up to 320 MBps data rates. While you will not come across any new systems shipping with SCSI connections, you might need to support legacy systems that use SCSI.\nSCSI could be used for both internal devices and external peripherals (such as scanners and printers) but you are very, very unlikely to find it used anywhere except for the connection of internal disk drives. While early SCSI types used 50-pin connectors, you are only likely to come across High Density (HD) 68-pin connectors or Single Connector Attachment (SCA) 80-pin connectors. SCA incorporates both a power connector and configuration wires, allowing for hot swappable drives.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_42.png)\nInternal and external male HD connectors. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nAlso, you should note that while parallel SCSI as a physical interface has almost completely disappeared, the software interface and command set are used in many other storage technologies, including Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), Firewire, and Storage Area Networks (SAN).\n\n• Molex connectors\nAs well as a data connection, an internal hard drive needs to be connected to the computer power supply. A computer power supply will come with a number of peripheral power connectors. For older devices, this power connection is made using Molex connectors and ports. A Molex connector is usually white and has 4 pins plus red, yellow, and black wires.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_43a.png)\nA Molex connector. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nNote: SATA drives are more likely to use the SATA power connector. Some devices might have both types of power connectors.\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

NETWORK CONNECTOR TYPES\nNetwork connections also use dedicated cable types, rather than multipurpose cabling such as USB and Thunderbolt.\n\n• RJ-45\nMost computers have a network adapter already installed as part of the motherboard chipset. The network adapter will have an RJ-45 port to connect the computer to the network, via another RJ-45 port in the network equipment. This port will be marked "LAN" (Local Area Network).\nAn RJ-45 (Registered Jack) connector is used with twisted pair cable for Ethernet local area networking products. Twisted pair is a type of copper cabling where pairs of insulated conductors are twisted around one another, to minimize electrical interference.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_43b.png)\nRJ-45 port and connector. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nRJ-45 connectors are used with 4-pair (8-wire) cables. The connectors are also referred to as 8P8C, standing for 8-position/8-contact. This means that all eight potential" wire positions are supplied with contacts, so that they can all carry signals if needed.\n\n• RJ-11\nSmaller RJ-11 connectors are used with 2- or 3-pair UTP or with flat ribbon "silver satin" phone cables. Typically only one pair carries the dial tone and voice circuit (also called the Tip and Ring wires after the way older phono plugs were wired). The other pair is usually unused but can be deployed for a secondary circuit. RJ-11 connectors are used for telephone systems (for example, to connect a modem to a phone jack).\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_44.png)\nRJ-11 port and connector. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nNote: An RJ-11 connector only has two contacts (6P2C); to use more pairs, an RJ-14 (6P4C) connector is required. This is physically the same size as RJ-11 but has more wired contacts.\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

EXPANSION CARDS\nExpansion cards(or add-on cards)can be installed on the motherboard to add functions or ports not provided as part of the chipset. An expansion card can be fitted to an appropriate slot (PCI or PCIe) on the motherboard.\n• I/O Adapters and Storage Cards.\nMost Input/Output (I/O) bus functions are provided on the motherboard, which will typically have USB ports for external peripherals and SATA ports for internal storage drives. An adapter card can be installed to provide additional ports or a bus type that is not supported on the motherboard. Typical examples include an eSATA host adapter to make external storage ports available, a flash memory card reader, a card with extra USB ports, or a card supporting wireless peripherals, such as Bluetooth.\n• Network Interface Cards (NICs)\nMost computers have a network adapter already installed as part of the motherboard chipset. However, there may be occasions when you need to install an add-on Network Interface Card (NIC) or need to upgrade an adapter to use a different type of network, bandwidth, or cabling.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_45.png)\nRJ-45 ports on a Network Interface Card (NIC). (Image © 123RF.com.)\nA Wi-Fi adapter can be added to connect to a wireless network. Wi-Fi adapters are developed to different 802.11 standards (802.11a/b/g/n/ac).\ntag: C1 L1 TC FIGURE

Activity 1-3\nIdentifying Connection Interfaces\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\nQuestion 1. In this graphic, identify the (A) audio ports, (B) video ports, and (C) USB ports.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_46.png)\n\nAnswer 1. Moving from left to right, the components should be labeled: C, B, C, A.\n\nQuestion 2. You are speaking with a junior technician. He is not sure what is meant by a keyed" connector. Can you tell him?\n\nAnswer 2. A keyed connector has a catch or slot to ensure that it cannot be inserted the wrong way round or used with an incompatible port.\n\nQuestion 3. What is the nominal data rate of a USB port supporting SuperSpeed+?\n\nAnswer 3. Normally 10 Gbps, but devices supporting USB 3.2 can use up to 20 Gbps over USB-C cabling.\n\nQuestion 4. True or false? USB-C ports and cables are compatible with Apple Lightning ports and cables.\n\nAnswer 4. False\n\nQuestion 5. What type of device would you connect a Molex cable to?\n\nAnswer 5. A Molex cable is a power cable. Normally, devices such as disk drives and optical drives require more power than can be delivered over the data bus. Note that most drives actually use SATA power connectors these days.\n\nQuestion 6. Why would you install an I/O adapter card?\n\nAnswer 6. To make more or different kinds of ports available (SCSI, USB, or SATA typically).\ntag: C1 L1 TC A1-3 FIGURE

Activity 1-4\nDemonstrating PC Disassembly and Reassembly\n\nBEFORE YOU BEGIN\nYour instructor will provide you with a WORKBENCH PC system to use to complete this activity. Make sure you find out the account credentials used to sign in. If a PC is not available for use in this activity, use the reference images provided instead. You will perform this activity at your WORKBENCH PC.\n\nSCENARIO\nYou are responsible for familiarizing new technical support staff on the hardware used for the workbench-by the company. You are going to show how to remove the PC case to compile type activities than for information about the components installed to add to system inventory documentation.\nNote: Activities may vary slightly if the software vendor has issued digital updates. Your instructor will notify you of any changes.\n\n1. Open a PC case and identify components on the motherboard.\na) The PC should be powered off and cables to devices should all be disconnected. If not, shut down the PC then remove all the cables, starting with the power connector.\nb) Carefully lift the system unit onto your workbench and remove the system case cover. Use this image if you don't have a computer to open.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_48.png)\nc) Without touching anything inside the system unit, identify the following components. You can move cables if they obstruct your view, but be careful not to dislodge them from their connectors. If you do not have access to a PC, identify the location of components in the image above instead. You will not be able to see as much as with a physical inspection, so do not worry if you cannot identify exact numbers and types.\n• CPU\n• Memory slots (number and type—DDR3 or DDR4 for instance)\n• Expansion slots (number of each type)\n• Drive ports (number of each type)\n• Power connectors (P1 and fans)\n• RTC battery\n• Front panel connectors\n\n2. Draw a diagram showing the layout of the components you identified above.\n(In the reference image, there are four DIMMs (DDR4 but the label is not legible), two of which are used. From top to bottom, the PCIe slots are x1, x16 (occupied by graphics adapter card), x4 (hard to see), and x16. There are two SATA ports on the right edge, connecting two HDDs. The card below them is an SSD connected to an M.2 port. There are actually two more SATA ports in the middle of the board, but these are obscured by the CPU heat sink—you can follow the cable back to the optical drive bay though. The RTC battery is just visible below the CPU, and learners should be able to make out the fan connections. The P1 connector is beneath the jumble of cables. Some of the front panel connectors on the bottom edge are easy to pick out from the cables. It isn't easy to identify their type, though (from left to right: audio in, USB, speaker). The connectors for another set of USB ports plus LED and power are beneath the cable ties. 3. Write down any problems you might suspect with the way the system is built (for example, cables not connected to devices, scorch marks, excessive dust or dirt, and so on).\nResponses will vary depending on the systems being examined.)\n\n4. When you have finished, replace the system case cover.\n\n5. Identify the external ports.\nYour system likely has a different number of ports, different ports, and different locations for some items. Use this image if you don't have a physical PC to examine.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_49.png)\n\n6. What ports can you identify?\nUSB 3 ports and plugs have blue tabs and usually an "SS" label for SuperSpeed. USB 2 ports and plugs are supposed to have white tabs but this is not so commonly observed. In the reference image, starting on the left there are two PS/2 ports (mouse and keyboard). Note that it is quite common for vendors to continue to include these on servers and workstations for use with KVM. Next to them is an RJ-45 port above two USB 2.0 ports. In the next block, there are two DP++ (DisplayPort) video ports and one DVI port. You haven't covered video ports yet, so don't worry if you can't identify the exact type. Next in the image are four USB 3 ports and finally the audio ports. The dedicated graphics adapter has a DVI and DP++ port.\n\n7. Demonstrate how to identify external ports on your WORKBENCH PC.\na) Inspect the PC and complete the table below to show the number of available ports (remember that there could be connectors on the back and the front of the PC). USB 2  USB 3  Thunderbolt (MiniDP or USB type)  Network (RJ-45)  Other (display connectors, for  instance)\nb) Check the ports carefully to ensure that none are damaged (for example, pins that are\nbroken, bent, or missing or mounting bolts that are loose or missing).\n\n8. Check the case labeling for the following information (this would be used to obtain support):\nVendor (OEM)  Model Number  Serial Number/  Service Tag\n\n9. Finally, demonstrate how to set up the PC for use again.\na) If the cabling is fine, connect the devices in the following order, taking care not to damage the connectors and to secure them properly (note that some devices might not be available to you—check with your instructor if you are unsure):\n• Mouse\n• Keyboard\n• Display screen\n• Microphone and speakers\n• Display power plug\n• PC power plug\nb) Check the routing of cables so that there are no trip hazards. Optionally, adjust the monitor so that it is the correct height for use (the top edge should be at eye level).\nc) When your instructor has checked the system, press the power button to turn it on.\nd) As the PC powers up, listen and look for the following signs that the computer is operating normally.\n• Power LED comes on.\n• Fans start spinning.\n• Hard disk activity—LED flickers and there may be some soft noise but grinding or clicking indicates a problem.\n• System firmware messages on the screen—if you do not see anything, check the display is connected and switched on.\n• Windows logo on the screen.\ne) Verify that the keyboard and mouse work. Sign in to the PC using the credentials provided.\n\n10. Your instructor might provide you with examples of device connections and interfaces and ask you or other participants to identify them.\ntag: C1 L1 TC A1-4 FIGURE

Topic D: Install Peripheral Devices\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-3.6 Explain the purposes and uses of various peripheral types. Much of the work that you will perform as a PC technician will involve installing and configuring various hardware and software components. As an IT professional, you will often find yourself setting up end-user workstations or helping those end users with the hardware they need to make their daily lives easier. Installing and configuring peripheral components—like keyboards and mice, or even more specialized devices—are some of the more common tasks that you will perform.\ntag: C1 L1 TD

INPUT DEVICES\nInput devices—or Human Interface Devices (HIDs)—are peripherals that enable the user to enter data and select commands. Computers need user input such as directions or commands and user interaction with the programs that are included in order to produce something of use.\nKeyboards and pointing devices are the standard input devices for personal computers these days, but there is an ever-growing number of input devices available for the user to interact with in a variety of ways. As well as command input, security systems often require different ways for users to input credentials to access an account or authorize a payment.\ntag: C1 L1 TD

KEYBOARDS\nThe keyboard is the longest serving type of input device. Historically, keyboards were connected via the 6-pin mini-DIN PS/2 port. This is colored purple to differentiate it from the identical form factor mouse connector. All keyboards are now USB or wireless (typically Bluetooth), though.\nExtended PC keyboards feature a number of special command keys (Alt and Ctrl plus keys such as Print Screen, NumLock, Scroll Lock, Start, Shortcut, and Function). A numeric keypad can be used to allow faster entry of numeric data or as an additional set of arrow keys (the function is toggled by NumLock). Multimedia keyboards may also feature programmable keys and buttons that can be used for web browsing, playing CDs/DVDs, and so on.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_53a.png)\nAn extended keyboard. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nWhen selecting a keyboard for a user, in addition to considering its ergonomics, you should also consider whether the keyboard offers additional features (such as customizable hot keys and scrolling) as well as wireless connectivity.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_53b.png)\nAn ergonomic keyboard. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nMost keyboards designed for use with Latin scripts use the QWERTY key layout. There are different layouts though, such as the small differences between US and UK layouts, the Dvorak alternative layout for Latin script, and keyboards for different scripts, such as Cyrillic. It is important that the keyboard type is set correctly in the OS.\nIn Windows, the type of keyboard layout is configured through the Language applet in Control Panel/Settings so that the computer knows which symbol to use when a particular key or key combination is pressed.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_54.png)\nLanguage and input options in Windows 10.\ntag: C1 L1 TD FIGURE

POINTING DEVICES\nWhile a keyboard can be used to navigate a window(using Tab and arrow keys, for pointing instance), most operating systems are designed to be used with some sort of Pointing Devices  A pointing device is usually used to move a cursor to select and manipulate objects on the screen.\n\nMOUSE\nThe mouse is the main type of pointing device for graphical software. Mice use the same interfaces as keyboards (the PS/2 port for a mouse is color-coded green, though). There are three main types:\n• Mechanical mouse—this contains rollers to detect the movement of a ball housed within the mouse case. As the user moves the mouse on a mat or other firm surface, the ball is moved and the rollers and circuitry translate that motion to move a cursor on the screen. Mechanical mice are no longer in production.\n• Optical mouse—this uses LEDs to detect movement over a surface.\n• Laser mouse—this uses an infrared laser, which gives greater precision than an optical mouse.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_55a.png)\nA basic mouse with a scroll wheel and four buttons (two main buttons on top and two side buttons). (Image © 123RF.com.)\nAnother distinguishing feature of different mouse models is the number of buttons (between two and four), which can be customized to different functions, and the presence of a scroll wheel, used (obviously) for scrolling and as a clickable extra button. Mice are also distinguished by their size and shape. Smaller mice are useful with portable systems; some mice are marketed on the basis of their ergonomic shape.\n\nTOUCHPAD\nA touchpad is a small, touch-sensitive pad where you run your finger across the surface to send electronic signals to the computer to control the pointer on the screen. Touchpads can have buttons like a mouse or trackball, or the touch pad can be configured to detect finger taps on its surface and process those signals like button clicks.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_55b.png)\nTouchpad on a laptop. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nTouchpads are most closely associated with laptop computers but it is possible to use them as peripheral devices with PCs, too. An external touchpad is connected using USB or Bluetooth.\n\nGAME CONTROLLERS\nPC games are mostly designed for use with the mouse and keyboard but some games (flight simulators, for instance) benefit from the use of a game controller, such as a joystick or game pad.  There are also controllers for specific game types, such as steering wheels for driving games and light guns for shooting games. As with most other peripherals, wired game controllers are connected using USB, whereas wireless models use Bluetooth. Joysticks can also be used as input devices by people who have difficulty using a mouse or keyboard.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_56a.png)\nA game controller. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TD FIGURE

KVM SWITCHES\nA Keyboard, Video, Mouse (KVM) switch allows multiple computers (typically servers) to be controlled via a single keyboard, mouse, and monitor. Some switches designed for home use also support speaker and microphone ports. Each computer's ports are cabled to the switch, then a single cable runs from the switch to the input and output devices.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_56b.png)\nA KVM switch with front and back views. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nSimple desktop KVM switches support two devices; control is usually switched using a Scroll Lock Scroll Lock Right Arrow\nkey sequence such as Scroll Lock + Scroll Lock + an arrow key (such as Right Arrow).\nServer-level KVM switches may support 10 or more ports and have more sophisticated controls.\ntag: C1 L1 TD FIGURE

SECURITY INPUT DEVICES\nSecurity input devices provide protection against unauthorized access to computing devices and resources. Commonly implemented security input devices include biometric devices and card readers.\n\nBIOMETRIC AUTHENTICATION DEVICES\nBiometric devices are used to perform authentication. Authentication means identifying someone as a valid user of the computer or network.\nBiometrics is an automated method of recognizing a person based on a physiological or behavioral characteristic unique to the individual, such as a retina pattern, fingerprint, or voice pattern. Biometric technologies are becoming the foundation of an extensive array of highly secure identification and personal verification solutions. Biometric input devices can add an additional layer of physical security or information security by verifying the identity of the person attempting to gain access to a location or device.\nBiometric devices will need to be installed and configured, and then initialized for the specific end user who will be using the device. The initial biometric authentication “object” for the user (be it a fingerprint, retina scan, pass phrase, etc.) must first be captured and stored. Then the user will have to test the device to make sure that it accurately verifies his or her identity against the authentication object, permitting them access to the location or device.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_57.png)\nTouching a fingerprint scanner. (Image © 123RF.com.)\nWhether or not a biometric device is being deployed will likely be a decision made based on an organizational security policy or standard. If biometric devices will be deployed at individual workstations, you will need to determine the specific biometric device's connector requirements; as most use a USB connection, you will need to make sure that the user's computer has an available USB port to connect the device.\n\nSMART CARD READERS\nA smart card reader provides a slot or NFC (contactless) interface to interact with a smart card. The reader is typically a peripheral device attached via a USB port but may be built into some laptop models. The microprocessor embedded in the smart card is used to store a digital certificate to prove the identity of the holder. The use of the certificate token is combined with a PIN or password to protect against loss or theft.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_58.png)\nA smart card reader. (Image © 123RF.com.)\n\nMAGNETIC STRIP/CHIP READERS\nIn the days before microprocessors could be made small enough to embed in a plastic wafer, the account number and other details of a credit or bank card were encoded in a magnetic strip. All bank-issued cards retain these magnetic strips for compatibility with legacy systems. When the card is swiped through a magnetic reader, the reader obtains the account details from the card. As with smart card readers, these would be attached as a USB peripheral.\nA chip reader works in the same way as a smartcard reader but is designed to work specifically with bank cards to support Point of Sale (POS) systems.\n\nNFC AND TAP PAY DEVICES\nAs mentioned above, a smart card can be contact-based or contactless. Many Near Field Communications (NFC) protocol contactless readers use the Near Feld Communication (NFC) protocal . NFC is a very short range radio link based on Radio Frequency ID (RFID). NFC normally works at up to 2 inches (6cm) at data rates of 106, 212, and 424 Kbps.\nAs well as cards, NFC sensors are now often integrated with smartphones, allowing their use as a kind of "electronic wallet." As with a chip reader, an NFC/tap pay terminal would be attached to the computer via a USB cable as part of a POS system.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_59a.png)\nNFC mobile payment between a smartphone and a payment processor. (Image © 123RF.com.)\n\nSIGNATURE PADS\nSignature recognition uses a signature pad and a database of approved signatures. A user signs the signature pad, and the recognition system analyzes the individual behavior of the person signing, such as the strokes used and the pressure applied while signing, to verify the identity of the user. If not hard-wired into a system (such as a security system), a signature capture pad used with a smaller device like a personal computer typically connects via a USB connection.\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_59b.png)\nA signature pad and pen. (Image © 123RF.com.)\ntag: C1 L1 TD FIGURE

INSTALLATION AND CONFIGURATION CONSIDERATIONS\nPeripheral devices for Windows computers are Plug-and-Play. This means that they can be added to the computer and the operating system will detect the device automatically and prompt you to configure it using a hardware or device setup wizard. Most devices also come with setup programs which will do the same job. They are required if the OS does not ship with the drivers required by the device.\n\nSYSTEM RESOURCES\nWhen you install a new device, such as a network card, sound card, or internal modem into a PC, it must be allocated a set of system resources that enable it to communicate with the CPU and memory without conflicting with other devices. This process is handled by Plug-and-Play.\nMemory Range/I/O Address:\nEvery device in the PC has its own set of unique memory addresses in an area called the I/O address map. The I/O address is a means for the CPU to communicate with a device. The address map is a block of system memory 65,536 bytes (64 KB) in size. The I/O port is referred to using its hexadecimal (or port) address in the range of 0000-FFFF.\nInterrupts (IRQ):\nAn I/O address tells the CPU where to look in memory to communicate with a device, but it must also know when to communicate with it! This is accomplished by the device raising an Interrupt Request (IRQ). Under the early PC architecture, each device was allocated an IRQ "line" from 0 to 15. Allocating the same IRQ to two devices was the cause of many problems on these early computers. Modern PCs use more advanced interrupt controllers to facilitate interrupts from multiple devices on a bus such as PCI or PCIe. Some core system components are still allocated IRQs from the 0 to 15 range, though.\n\nHOT SWAP\nMost devices connected over USB are hot swappable. This means that the device can be added to or removed from the computer while it is switched on. Devices attached via legacy interfaces may need the PC to be restarted.\nNote: You may also see the term hot pluggable used. Technically, a hot pluggable device can be installed while the system is running but cannot necessarily be removed safely without shutting down the computer. A fully hot swappable device can be added or removed without an OS restart.\n\nDRIVERS\nBefore connecting a device, you may need to install its driver using the vendor-supplied software. A driver is software that creates an interface between the device and the operating system. It may also include tools for configuring and optimizing the device. Many devices have drivers that are shipped along with Windows or made available over Windows Update, but even in that case the vendor may be able to supply a more up-to-date driver. Output devices such as monitors and speakers do not generally require drivers, but input devices such as mice, keyboards, and touchscreens do.\n\nCONNECTIONS\nAssuming the correct driver is available to the OS, adding and removing external peripherals is then just a case of plugging or unplugging the connector into the correct type of socket. USB has simple push/pull connectors that are keyed to prevent incorrect insertion. Connectors for legacy ports often have screws to hold them in place. RJ-11 and RJ-45 connectors have a plastic clip that must be pressed down to remove.\n\nCONFIGURATION\nThe OS will detect and install the device automatically. You can then use Device Manager, Control Panel, Windows Settings, or the vendor-supplied software to configure user settings.\ntag: C1 L1 TD

GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLING PERIPHERAL DEVICES\nFollow these guidelines for working with peripheral devices.\n\nINSTALLING PERIPHERAL DEVICES\nHere are some guidelines for you to consider when you are adding or removing peripheral devices:\n• Always read the manufacturer's instructions and check that the device is compatible with the PC and operating system.\n• Hold the connector, not the cable, when removing a lead.\n• Inspect the connector and port for damage (notably broken or bent pins) before attaching a lead.\n• Take care to align the connector carefully and do not use excessive force, to avoid damaging the pins.\n• Check whether the device requires an external power source.\ntag: C1 L1 TD

Activity 1-5\nDiscussing Peripheral Device Installation\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\nQuestion 1. A remote user has requested a Dvorak keyboard for use with her Windows 10 computer. The device has arrived and the user connected it to a USB port. She contacts support saying that the keyboard "isn't typing properly." What is the likely cause of this issue?\n\nAnswer 1. The appropriate keyboard layout has not been selected in Settings.\n\nQuestion 2. You are contacted by another remote user. The user has a laptop and desktop computer. The user wants to know if there is a device that would allow them to use the same peripheral devices with both systems without having to switch cables over all the time.\nWhat is your answer?\n\nAnswer 2. Yes, you can use a Keyboard Video Mouse (KVM) switch for this purpose.\n\nQuestion 3. You are supporting a client setting up a Point of Sale system.\nWhich peripheral device types or functions should she consider?\n\nAnswer 3. A POS system reads the information stored on the customer's payment card or digital wallet. Historically, this information was stored in the card's magnetic strip. Most POS devices retain a magnetic reader as a backup mechanism. The majority of bank cards now also store the account information in an embedded chip, which can be read by inserting the card into the reader. This chip may also support contactless use or Near Field Communications (NFC). A customer can also store the card details in a smartphone and use the smartphone's NFC chip to make payments. Not all POS readers support contactless and it would carry a slight price premium, so your client should decide whether it is important to offer this payment method to her customers.\n\nQuestion 4. You have finished copying some files to a USB memory stick.\nWhat should you do before unplugging the stick?\n\nAnswer 4. Use the Safely Remove Hardware icon to stop the device.\ntag: C1 L1 TD A1-5

Topic E: Troubleshooting Methodology\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-5.1 Given a scenario, use the best practice methodology to resolve problems.\nOften, computer technicians spend a large percentage of their time troubleshooting the various software and hardware components used in computers, networks, and printers. Before you can even begin to troubleshoot a physical problem with a piece of hardware or diagnose an error thrown up by a software program, you need to understand the basics of troubleshooting and some best practices used.\nThe most elaborate toolkit and expensive diagnostic software can be useless if you do not have a consistent plan for solving problems. Even experienced technicians can sometimes overlook obvious problems or solutions. Troubleshooting can be extremely challenging, but if you follow common best practices and basic troubleshooting procedures, you will often be able to determine the specific cause of a problem, as well as possible solutions to the problem.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

TROUBLESHOOTING BASICS\nTo some extent, being an effective troubleshooter simply involves having a detailed knowledge of how something is supposed to work and of the sort of things that typically go wrong. However, the more complex a system is, the less likely it is that this sort of information will be at hand, so it is important to develop general troubleshooting skills to approach new and unexpected situations confidently. Troubleshooting is a process of problem solving. It is important to realize that problems have causes, symptoms, and consequences. For example:\n• A computer system has a fault in the hard disk drive (cause).\n• Because the disk drive is faulty, the computer is displaying a "blue screen" (symptom).\n• Because of the fault, the user cannot do any work (consequence). From a business point-of-view, resolving the consequences of the problem is more important than solving the original cause. For example, the most effective solution might be to provide the user with another workstation, then get the drive replaced.\nIt is also important to realize that the cause of a specific problem might be the symptom of a larger problem. This is particularly true if the same problem recurs. For example, you might ask why the disk drive is faulty—is it a one-off error or are there problems in the environment, supply chain, and so on?\ntag: C1 L1 TE

PROBLEM MANAGEMENT\nAny organization that has to deal with more than a few problems every week will have a system in place for problem management. The basis of problem management is the identification, prioritization, and ownership of incidents. The process of problem management is as follows:\n1. A user contacts the help desk, perhaps by phone or email. An operator or technician is assigned to the incident and a job ticket is generated.\n2.The user describes the problem to the operator, who may ask clarifying questions. The operator categorizes the problem, assesses how urgent it is, and how long it will take to fix.\n3. The operator may take the user through initial troubleshooting steps. If these do not work, the job may be escalated to deskside support or a senior technician.\n4. Troubleshooting continues until the problem is resolved. At that point, the user is contacted to confirm that the problem has been fixed. The job ticket is updated with details of the problem and how it was resolved. The ticket is then considered closed.\nAt each stage, the problem management system can track the ownership of the problem (who is dealing with it) and its status (what has been done). At each stage of problem management, you need to consider and be guided by corporate policies, procedures, and impacts before making changes. An enterprise network is, by definition, highly interconnected. Even small changes can have major, unintended impacts, so it is imperative that you follow established change management procedures and know when to seek authority to make a change.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

THE COMPTIA A+ TROUBLESHOOTING MODEL\nHere are the steps in CompTIA's A+ troubleshooting model:\n1. Identify the problem.\n• Question user and identify user changes to computer.\n• Perform backups before making changes.\n• Inquire regarding environmental or infrastructure changes.\n• Review system and application logs.\n2. Establish a theory of probable cause (question the obvious and if necessary conduct internal or external research based on symptoms).\n3. Test the theory to determine cause:\n• Once theory is confirmed, determine next steps to resolve problem.\n• If theory is not confirmed, re-establish new theory or escalate.\n4. Establish a plan of action to resolve the problem and implement the solution.\n5. Verify full system functionality, and if applicable, implement preventative measures.\n6. Document findings, actions, and outcomes.\nThese steps and the approach and attitude you should apply when troubleshooting are explained in a bit more detail in the next section.\n\nNote: A methodical process is the ideal, but troubleshooting in help desk and IT support departments is often a time-critical process. In the real world, you often have to balance being methodical with being efficient.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

CUSTOMER SERVICE AND COMMUNICATIONS SKILLS\nEmployers value "soft skills," such as being able to communicate and use questioning, as highly as technical skills. Troubleshooting is one area where soft skills are vital:\n• A user may be upset or angry—perhaps they have lost work or cannot get an expensive, new computer to work.\n• A user may not be technically knowledgeable.\nIt is your job to calm the user and to help him or her give you the information you need to diagnose and solve the problem. You need to be able to ask questions that the user can answer simply, without having to know anything about the computer or its software, and guide him or her through basic troubleshooting steps. When speaking with a user, try to be calm and polite. Do not interrupt when the user is speaking. Do not use technical language (jargon) or abbreviations that are likely to confuse.\n\nOPEN AND CLOSED QUESTIONING\nThe basis of getting troubleshooting information from users is asking good questions. Questions are commonly divided into two types:\n• Open questions invite someone to explain in their own words. Examples are, "What is the problem? What happens when you try to switch the computer on? Were you able to complete this task before, and if so, when did you notice there was an issue?", and "What types of changes have you noticed since the last time you\ncompleted this task?"\n• Closed questions invite a Yes/No answer or a fixed response. Examples include, Can you see any text on the screen?" or "What does the error message say?"\nOpen questions are good to start with as they help to avoid making your own assumptions about what is wrong and encourage the user to give you all the information that he or she is able to. However, you should not trust the user's judgment completely. The user may be inexperienced or have formed a false impression of what is going wrong. Try to establish factual information rather than asking for the user's opinion.\nClosed questions can be used to "drill down" into the nature of the problem and guide a user towards giving you information that is useful.\n\nDEVELOPING A TROUBLESHOOTING MINDSET\nTroubleshooting is not just the application of technical knowledge and expertise; the approach you choose to take is equally important.\n• Be calm—if you are calm, it instills confidence in the customer and will also prevent you from making rash decisions.\n• Take breaks—troubleshooting requires a great deal of concentration. After a long period of working on the same task, the mind can become fatigued and concentration is reduced. Consider taking breaks or leaving the problem for a while to refresh your mind.\n• Challenge assumptions—a problem may be reported that is similar to one that you have experienced before, but you should not assume that the problem is identical. Although the symptoms may be similar, the problem and its solution could be completely different. Always treat each problem as a new challenge. Be prepared to try something different. If you have decided what the problem is, but cannot seem to solve it, it may be that you are incorrect. Be prepared to start again from the beginning with an open mind.\n• Assess costs and impacts—remember, you must account for corporate policies and evaluate the impact of a problem. A particular problem might be a stimulating nchallenge, but if resolving it is not the highest priority in terms of business needs, you need to give up on finding "The Answer" and use a shortcut to get to a solution.\nWhen assessing whether to repair a part, consider the cost of the part and the cost of your time to perform the repair. In many circumstances, replacement is the most effective option.\n• Know when to give up!—you will not always be able to fix the problem yourself. Be prepared to pass the problem on rather than wasting the customer's time!\ntag: C1 L1 TE

PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION\nWhen troubleshooting, unless the problem is very simple, it is best to work methodically to ensure that you diagnose the correct problem and choose the best way to resolve it. The traditional method for problem solving is to find the cause of the problem and then to seek to remove or resolve that cause. If you switch your television on and the screen remains dark, you would seek out the cause and then remove it. Finding the actual cause may involve identifying several possible causes and then checking them out one by one to determine a probable cause. If your television stops working, you could ask yourself, "Is the problem in the television? Has the fuse blown?\nIs there a problem at the broadcasting station rather than with my television?". With all problems we run through a list of possibilities before making a decision. The trick is to do this methodically (so that possible causes are not overlooked) and efficiently (so that the problem can be solved quickly). Troubleshooting is not just a problem-solving process, though. It requires effective decision-making. Sometimes there is no simple solution to a problem. There may be several solutions and which is best might not be obvious. An apparent solution might solve the symptoms of the problem but not the cause. A solution might be impractical or too costly. Finally, a solution might be the cause of further problems, which could be even worse than the original problem.\n\nBE PREPARED\nBefore you visit a user or customer to fix a problem, ensure that you have all the necessary hardware and software tools, documentation, and any other information you may need to avoid repeated and unnecessary trips between your office and the customer's location.\nIf you are instructing a user over the phone or by email, make sure you offer clear, concise, and accurate instructions.\nIf troubleshooting requires that the system be taken offline, make sure that this is scheduled appropriately and sensitively. Remember that troubleshooting may involve more than fixing a particular problem; it is about maintaining the resources that users need to do their work.\n\nPERFORM BACKUPS\nConsider the importance of data stored on the local computer when performing troubleshooting or maintenance. Check when a backup was last made. If a backup has not been made, perform one before changing the system configuration, if at all possible. The simplest way of making a backup before troubleshooting is to use drive imaging software.\n\nQUESTION THE USER\nThe first report of a problem will typically come from a user or another technician, and they will be one of the best sources of information, if you can ask the right questions. Before you begin examining settings in Windows or taking the PC apart, spend some time gathering as much information as you can about the problem. Ensure you ask the user to describe all of the circumstances. Some good questions to ask include:\n• What are the exact error messages appearing on the screen or coming from the speaker? Remember that the error could reveal a symptom, not a cause.\n• Has anyone else experienced the same problem?\n• How long has the problem been occurring?\n• What changes have been made recently to the system? Were these changes initiated by you, or via another support request? The latest change to a system is very often the cause of the problem. If something worked previously, then excepting mechanical failures, it is likely that the problem has arisen because of some user-initiated change or some environmental or infrastructure change. If something has never worked, a different approach is required.\n• Has anything been tried to solve the problem?\ntag: C1 L1 TE

SOURCES OF INFORMATION\nOf course, you cannot always rely on the user to let you know everything that has happened. To diagnose a problem, you may also need to use the following techniques:\n• Make a physical inspection—look and listen. You may be able to see or hear a fault (scorched motherboard, "sick"-sounding disk drive, no fan noise, and so on).\n• If the symptoms of the problem are no longer apparent, a basic technique is to reproduce the problem—that is, repeat the exact circumstances that produced the failure or error. Some problems are intermittent, though, which means that they cannot be repeated reliably. Issues that are transitory or difficult to reproduce are often the hardest to troubleshoot.\n• Check system and application logs or diagnostic software for information.\n• Check the system documentation, such as installation or maintenance logs, for useful information.\n• Consult any other technicians that might have worked on the system recently or might be working at the moment on some related issue. Consider that environmental or infrastructure changes might have been instigated by a different group within the company. Perhaps you are responsible for application support and the network infrastructure group has made some changes without issuing proper notice.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

DETERMINATION OF PROBABLE CAUSES\nIf you obtain accurate answers to your initial questions, you will have determined the severity of the problem (how many are affected), a rough idea of where to look (hardware or OS for instance), and whether to look for a recent change or an oversight in configuration.\nYou diagnose a problem by identifying the symptoms. From knowing what causes such symptoms, you can consider possible cause to determine the most probable cause and then devise tests to show whether it is the cause or not. Sometimes symptoms derive from more than one cause; while this type of problem is rarer, it is much harder to troubleshoot. A computer system comprises a number of components. Fault finding needs to identify which component is faulty.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

QUESTIONING THE OBVIOUS\nThere are two good ways to consider a computer problem systematically:\n• Step through what should happen, either yourself or by observing the user, and identify the point at which there is a failure or error.\n• Work up or down layers—for example, power, hardware components, drivers/ firmware, software, network, user actions.\nWith either approach, do not overlook the obvious—sometimes seemingly intractable problems are caused by the simplest things.\n\nNote: A basic technique when troubleshooting a cable, connector, or device is to have a known good" duplicate on hand. This is another copy of the same cable or device that you know works that you can use to test by substitution. This approach very quickly identifies "non-causes."\n\nUnless a problem is trivial, break the troubleshooting process into compartments or categories. If you can isolate your investigation to a particular subsystem by eliminating "non-causes," you can troubleshoot the problem more quickly. For example, when troubleshooting a PC, you might work as follows:\n1. Decide whether the problem is hardware or software related (Hardware).\n2. Decide which hardware subsystem is affected (Disk).\n3. Decide whether the problem is in the disk unit or connectors and cabling (Connector).\n4. Test your theory.\nWhen you have drilled down like this, the problem should become obvious. Of course, you could have made the wrong choice at any point, so you must be prepared to go back and follow a different path.\n\nNote: If you are really unlucky, two (or more) components may be faulty. Another difficulty lies in assessing whether a component itself is faulty or whether it is not working because of a related component.\n\nRESEARCHING THE PROBLEM\nOne of the most useful troubleshooting skills is being able to do research; to find information quickly. Learn to use web and database search tools so that you can locate information that is relevant and useful. Identify different knowledge sources available to you. Consider both internally available documentation and problem logs and external support resources, such as vendor support or forums.\n\nRE-ESTABLISHING A NEW THEORY\nIf your theory is not proven by the tests you make or the research you undertake, you must establish a new theory. If one does not suggest itself from what you have discovered so far, there may be more lengthy procedures you can use to diagnose a cause—remember to assess business needs before embarking on very lengthy and possibly disruptive tests. Is there a simpler workaround that you are overlooking?\nIf a problem is particularly intractable, you can do the reverse of the above process and take the system down to its base configuration (the minimum needed to run). When (if) this is working, you can then add peripherals and devices or software subsystems one-by-one, testing after each, until eventually the problem is located. This is time-consuming, but may be necessary if nothing else is providing a solution.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

PROBLEM ESCALATION\nBe aware that you may not have all the answers all the time. Consider consulting your colleagues, Internet discussion groups, or manufacturers' help lines. This will not only help you to solve the problem more quickly or identify a better solution than you had considered yourself, but will also increase your knowledge and experience. If you cannot solve a problem yourself, it is better to escalate it than to waste a lot of time trying to come up with an answer. Formal escalation routes depend on the type of support service you are operating and the terms of any warranties or service contracts that apply. Some obvious escalation routes include:\n• Senior staff/Knowledge Experts/Subject Matter Experts/technical staff/developers/ programmers/administrators within your company.\n• Suppliers and manufacturers—warranty and support contracts and helplines or web contact portals.\n• Other support contractors/consultants, websites, and social media.\nChoosing whether to escalate a problem is complex as you have to balance the need to resolve a problem in a timely fashion with what might be additional costs and the burdens/priorities that senior staff are already coping with. You should be guided by policies and practices in the company you work for. When you escalate a problem, make sure that what you have found out or attempted so far is documented. Failing that, describe the problem clearly to whoever is taking over or providing you with assistance.\nIf you are completing troubleshooting steps under instruction from another technician—the vendor's support service, for instance—make sure you properly understand the steps you are being asked to take, especially if it requires disassembly of a component or reconfiguration of software that you are not familiar with.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

SOLUTION IMPLEMENTATION AND TESTING\nIf you have established and tested a theory of cause, it should be apparent what steps are required to resolve the issue. There are typically three solutions to an IT problem:\n• Repair—you need to determine whether the cost of repair makes this the best option.\n• Replace—often more expensive and may be time-consuming if a part is not available. There may also be an opportunity to upgrade the part or software.\n• Workaround—as any software developer will tell you, not all problems are critical. If neither repair nor replacement is cost-effective, it may be best either to find a workaround or just to document the issue and move on.\n\nNote: If a part or system is under warranty, you can return the broken part for a replacement. To do this, you normally need to obtain a Returned Materials Authorization (RMA) ticket from the vendor.\n\nWhen you consider solutions, you have to assess the cost and time required. Another consideration is potential effects on the rest of the system that your plan of action may have and whether you have authorization to proceed. A typical example is applying a software patch, which might fix a given problem but cause other programs not to work. This is where an effective change and configuration management system comes into play, as it should help you to understand how different systems are interconnected and cause you to seek the proper authorization for your plan.\n\nIMPLEMENT THE SOLUTION\nIf you do not have authorization to implement a solution, you will need to escalate the problem to more senior personnel. If applying the solution is disruptive to the wider network or business, you also need to consider the most appropriate time to schedule the reconfiguration work and plan how to notify other network users. When you make a change to the system as part of implementing a solution, test after each change. If the change does not fix the problem, reverse it and then try something else. If you make a series of changes without recording what you have done, you could find yourself in a tricky position.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

VERIFICATION AND DOCUMENTATION\nWhen you apply a solution, test that it fixes the reported problem and that the system as a whole continues to function normally. Tests could involve any of the following:>\n• Trying to use a component.\n• Substituting the component for a "known good" one.\n• Inspecting a component to see whether it is properly connected or damaged or whether any status or indicator lights show a problem.\n• Disabling or uninstalling the component (if it might be the cause of a wider problem).\n• Consulting documentation and software tools such as Device Manager to confirm a component is configured properly.\n• Updating software or a device driver.\nBefore you can consider a problem closed, you should both be satisfied in your own mind that you have resolved it and get the customer's acceptance that it has been fixed. Restate what the problem was and how it was resolved then confirm with the customer that the incident log can be closed.\n\nPREVENTIVE MEASURES\nTo fully solve a problem, you should try to eliminate any factors that could cause the problem to reoccur. For example, if the power cable on a PC blows a fuse, you should not only replace the fuse, but also check to see if there are any power problems in the building that may have caused the fuse to blow in the first place. If a computer is infected with a virus, ensure that the antivirus software is updating itself regularly and users are trained to avoid malware risks.\n\n\nDOCUMENT FINDINGS, ACTIONS, AND OUTCOMES\nMost troubleshooting takes place within the context of a ticket system. This shows who is responsible for any particular problem and what its status is. This gives you the opportunity to add a complete description of the problem and its solution (findings, actions, and outcomes).\nThis is very useful for future troubleshooting, as problems fitting into the same category can be reviewed to see if the same solution applies. Troubleshooting steps can be gathered into a "Knowledge Base" or Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) of support articles. It also helps to analyze IT infrastructure by gathering statistics on what types of problems occur and how frequently.\nThe other value of a log is that it demonstrates what the support department is doing to help the business. This is particularly important for third-party support companies, who need to prove the value achieved in service contracts. When you complete a problem log, remember that people other than you may come to rely on it. Also, logs may be presented to customers as proof of troubleshooting activity. Write clearly and concisely, checking for spelling and grammar errors.\ntag: C1 L1 TE

Activity 1-6\nDiscussing Troubleshooting Methodology\n\nSCENARIO\nActivity: Discussing Troubleshooting Methodology\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\nQuestion 1. You are dealing with a support request and think that you have identified the probable cause of the reported problem.\nWhat should be your next troubleshooting step?\n\nAnswer 1. Test the theory to determine the cause.\nQuestion 2. If you have to open the system case to troubleshoot a computer, what should you check before proceeding?\n\nAnswer 2. That data on the PC has been backed up. You should always verify that you have a backup before beginning any troubleshooting activities.\n\nQuestion 3.You receive a support call from a user. What should be your first troubleshooting step?\n\nAnswer 3. Question the user to establish all the circumstances surrounding the problem.\n\nQuestion 4. Why does it help to categorize a problem when troubleshooting?\n\nAnswer 4. A step-by-step analysis of the problem helps by making sure you approach it methodically and troubleshooting within a more limited area is simpler.\n\nQuestion 5. If another technician says to you, "We\'ll have to strip this back to base?" what do they mean, and at which specific step of troubleshooting are you likely to be?\n\nAnswer 5. Bringing a system "back to base" means re-building a troublesome system from its core components. You can then add extra devices one by one until the source of the fault is revealed. This can be time-consuming so is likely to be something you would try if you are testing a theory of probable cause unsuccessfully, and you need to establish a new theory.\n\nQuestion 6. What should you do if you cannot determine the cause of a problem?\n\nAnswer 6. You could consult a colleague, refer to product documentation, or search the web. It might also be appropriate to escalate the problem to more senior support staff.\n\nQuestion 7. You think you have discovered the solution to a problem in a product Knowledge Base, and the solution involves installing a software patch. What should be your next troubleshooting step?\n\nAnswer 7. Identify any negative consequences in applying the software patch, then devise an implementation plan to install the file. You need to schedule the work so as to minimize disruption. You should also make a plan to rollback the installation, should that prove necessary.\n\nQuestion 8. After applying a troubleshooting repair, replacement, or upgrade, what should you do next?\n\nAnswer 8. Test that the fix works and that the system as a whole is functional. You might also implement preventative measures to reduce the risk of the problem\noccurring again.\n\nQuestion 9. What is the last step in the best practice methodology for troubleshooting and how might it be implemented?\n\nAnswer 9. Document findings, actions, and outcomes. You can use spreadsheet or database tools, but using ticket-based management system software to create incident logs is best.\ntag: C1 L1 TE A1-6

Lesson 1 Summary\nIn this lesson, you identified core hardware components, various connection interfaces, and a troubleshooting methodology, and you installed peripheral components.\n\nQuestion 1. Will there be any specialty input devices that you will need to install or configure at your workplace? How might this affect your day-to-day activities as an IT professional?\n\nAnswer 1. Answers will vary according to the type of business where the individual works or expects to work. If the company has a great need for security, biometric devices may be incorporated at many key levels of entry, including computers. Specialty input devices might include touch screens, barcode readers, gamepads, or interactive whiteboards. Having knowledge of various types of devices, how they work, and how they are installed and configured will be necessary. Keeping up with evolving technology will likely be necessary as well.\n\nQuestion 2. Which part of the CompTIA A+ Troubleshooting Model do you expect to find most challenging, and why?\n\nAnswer 2. Answers will vary, but might include identifying the problem, because some symptoms can be caused by unusual issues.\ntag: C1 L1 SUMMARY
