The Official CompTIA® A+® Core 1\nStudent Guide (Exam 220-1001)

COPYRIGHT NOTICE\nCopyright © 2019 CompTIA, Inc. All rights reserved. Screenshots used for illustrative purposes are the property of the software proprietor. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of CompTIA, 3500 Lacey Road, Suite 100, Downers Grove, IL 60515-5439. This book conveys no rights in the software or other products about which it was written; all use or licensing of such software or other products is the responsibility of the user according to terms and conditions of the owner. If you believe that this book, related materials, or any other CompTIA materials are being reproduced or transmitted without permission, please call 1-866-835-8020 or visit www.help.comptia.org.

Table of Contents\nLesson 7: Implementing Client Virtualization and Cloud Computing....... 397\nTopic A: Configure Client-Side Virtualization..................................................398\nTopic B: Cloud Computing Concepts................................................................ 407\ntag:C1 L7 TOC

The Official CompTIA® IT Fundamentals+ (Exam FC0-U61)\nIn this course, you will install, configure, optimize, troubleshoot, repair, upgrade, and perform preventive maintenance on personal computers and digital devices. You will:\n• Install and configure PC system unit components and peripheral devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot display and multimedia devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot storage devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot internal system components.\n• Explain network infrastructure concepts.\n• Configure and troubleshoot network connections.\n• Implement client virtualization and cloud computing.\n• Support and troubleshoot laptops.\n• Support and troubleshoot mobile devices.\n• Install, configure, and troubleshoot print devices.\ntag:A+ Core1

Lesson 7\nImplementing Client Virtualization and Cloud Computing\n\nLESSON INTRODUCTION\nAs organizations grow in size and scope, there is an increased need for resources, especially when it comes to computing. Virtualization can help ease the growing pains of an organization by providing the opportunity to leverage one computer and one operating system for use over many systems, and save valuable time and resources when it comes to hardware, software, and personnel.\n\nVirtualization is also the technology underpinning cloud computing; one of the dominant trends in networking. Many organizations are outsourcing parts of their IT infrastructure, platforms, storage, or services to a cloud service provider. Virtualization is at the core of cloud service provider networks. As a CompTIA® A+® technician, your customers will expect you to be able to advise on types of cloud deployments and identify some of the configuration issues involved in connecting to cloud services.\n\nLESSON OBJECTIVES\nIn this lesson, you will:\n• Set up and configure a hypervisor and virtual machine guests.\n• Identify the purposes and types of cloud services.\ntag:C1 L7

Topic A\nConfigure Client-Side Virtualization\n\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-4.2 Given a scenario, set up and configure client-side virtualization.\n\nVirtualization separates the elements of the computing environment―the applications, operating system, programs, documents, and more―from each other and from the physical hardware by using an additional software layer to mediate access. Virtualization can provide flexibility and scalability for organizations where the costs for hardware and software and the IT infrastructure needed to maintain them both continue to increase. It can increase resource utilization by allowing resources to be pooled and leveraged as part of a virtual infrastructure, and it can provide for centralized administration and management of all the resources being used virtualization. As a CompTIA A+ technician, you will often be called upon to deploy, configure, and support Virtual Machines (VMs). You need to know about the types, capabilities, and uses of different virtualization technologies.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

VIRTUALIZATION\n\nWhen computers based on the microprocessor CPU were first produced, a single computer was designed to run a single operating system at any one time. This makes multiple applications available on that computer—whether it be a workstation or server—but the applications must all share a common OS environment. Some computers were configured with two or more operating systems and could choose the one to load at boot time (multiboot). The operating systems could not be used simultaneously, however.\n\nDramatic improvements and cost reductions in CPU and system memory technology mean that all but the cheapest computers are now capable of virtualization. Virtualization means that multiple operating systems can be installed and run simultaneously on a single computer.\n\nThere are many different ways of implementing this and many different reasons for doing it. In general terms, though, a virtual platform requires at least three components:\n• Computer(s)—the platform or host for the virtual environment. Optionally, there may be multiple computers networked together.\n• Hypervisor or Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM)—manages the virtual machine environment and facilitates interaction with the host hardware and network.\n• Guest operating systems or Virtual Machines (VMs)—operating systems installed under the virtual environment. The number of operating systems is generally only restricted by hardware capacity. The type of guest operating systems might be restricted by the type of hypervisor.\n\nThe presence of other guest OSs can be completely transparent to any single OS. Each OS "thinks" it is working with a normal CPU, memory, hard disk, and network link. The guest OSs can be networked together or they may be able to share data directly through the hypervisor, though for security reasons this is not commonly implemented.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

HYPERVISORS\n\nAs noted previously, a hypervisor manages the virtual machine environment and facilitates interaction with the host hardware and network.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_399.png)\nMicrosoft Hyper-V hypervisor software. This machine is running severl Windows and Linux guest operating systems. You can see each is allocated a portion of system memory to use. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)\n\nSome of the main functions of the hypervisor include:\n• Emulation—each guest OS expects exclusive access to resources such as the CPU, system memory, storage devices, and peripherals. The hypervisor emulates these resources and facilitates access to them to avoid conflicts between the guest OSs. The VMs must be provided with drivers for the emulated hardware components.\n• Guest OS support—the hypervisor may be limited in terms of the different types of guest operating systems it can support. Virtualization is often used as a means of installing old OSs, such as MS-DOS or Windows 9x, as well as modern versions of Windows and Linux.\n\nNote: macOS can also be installed as a VM. This breaks the terms of Apple's EULA if the hardware platform is not itself an Apple PC.\n\n• Assigning resources to each guest OS—for example, if the host computer has 4 GB memory, 1 GB might be required by the host OS, leaving 3 GB to assign to each guest OS. You could have three guests, each configured with 1 GB, for instance. Similarly, each guest OS will take up disk space on the host. Data is saved to virtual disk image files.\n• Configuring networking—a hypervisor will be able to create a virtual network environment through which all the VMs can communicate. It will also be able to create a network shared by the host and by VMs on the same host and on other hosts. Enterprise virtual platforms allow the configuration of virtual switches and routers.\n• Configuring security—ensures that guests are "contained" and cannot access other VMs or the host except through authorized mechanisms. This is important to prevent data "leaking" from one VM to another, to prevent one compromised VM from compromising others, and to prevent malware from spreading between VMs or from a VM to the host.\n\nOne basic distinction that can be made between virtual platforms is between host and bare metal methods of interacting with the computer hardware.\n\nHOST-BASED HYPERVISOR\nIn a guest OS (or host-based) system, the hypervisor application, known as a Type 2 hypervisor,  is itself installed onto a host operating system. Examples of host-based hypervisors include VMware Workstation™, Oracle  VirtualBox, and Parallels Workstation is designed to run on macOS . You cannot run it on a Windows  PC but you use it to run a Windows VM on macOS.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_400.png)\nGuest OS virtualization (Type 2 Hypervisor). The hypervisor is an application running within a native OS and guest OSs are installed within the hypervisor.\n\nBARE METAL HYPERVISOR\nA bare metal virtual platform means that the hypervisor—called a KVM is Type 1 or Type —is installed directly onto the computer and manages access to the host hardware without going through a host OS. Examples include VMware ESX  Server, Microsoft's  Hyper-V , and Citrix's XEN Server. The hardware need only support the base system  requirements for the hypervisor plus resources for the type and number of guest OSs that will be installed. Linux  also supports virtualization through Kernel-based Virtual  Machine (KVM). KVM is embedded in the Linux kernel.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_401.png)\nType 1 "bare metal" hypervisor. The hypervisor is installed directly on the host hardware along with a management application, then VMs are installed within the hypervisor.\n\nNote: If the hypervisor is running in a 64-bit environment, 32-bit guest OSs can still be installed, providing the hypervisor supports them. 32-bit hypervisors will not support 64-bit guest OSs, however.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

PROCESSOR SUPPORT AND RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS\n\nCPU vendors have built special instruction set extensions to facilitate virtualization. The Intel technology for this is called VT-x (Virtualization Technology) while AMD calls it AMD-V. Most virtualization products also benefit from a processor feature called Second Level Address Translations (SLAT), which improves the performance of virtual memory when multiple VMs are installed. Intel implements SLAT as a feature called Extended Page Table (EPT) and AMD calls it Rapid Virtualization Indexing (RVI).\n\nMost virtualization software requires a CPU with virtualization support enabled and performance of the VMs will be impaired if virtualization is not supported in the Note that the "x" in VT-hardware. Some cheaper CPU models ship without the feature and sometimes the feature is disabled in the system firmware. If specifying a computer that will be used for virtualization, check the CPU specification carefully to confirm that it supports Intel VT-x or AMD-V and SLAT, if necessary.\n\nMultiple CPU resources—whether through Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) or multiple physical processors, multicore, or HyperThreading—will greatly benefit performance, especially if more than one guest OS is run concurrently.\n\nAs mentioned earlier, each guest OS requires sufficient system memory over and above what is required by the host. For example, it is recommended that Windows 7 be installed on a computer with at least 1 GB memory. This means that the host must have at least 2 GB and possibly more. As you can see, if you want to run multiple guest operating systems concurrently, the resource demands can quickly add up. If the VMs are only used for development and testing, then performance might not be critical and you may be able to specify less memory.\n\nEach guest OS also takes up a substantial amount of disk space. The VM\'s "hard disk" is stored as an image file on the host. Most hypervisors use a "dynamically expanding" image format that only takes up space on the host as files are added to the guest OS. Even so, a typical Windows installation might require 20 GB. More space is required if you want to preserve snapshots. A snapshot is the state of a disk at a particular point-in-time. This is useful if you want to be able to roll back changes you make to the VM during a session.\n\nNote: In an enterprise environment, you need not be constrained by the local disk resources on the host. Disk images could be stored in a high-speed Storage Area Network (SAN).\n\nMost hypervisors also allow guest VMs to use the host's adapters (sound card, for instance) and peripherals (input devices, printers, and USB devices, for instance).\ntag:C1 L7 TA

VIRTUAL NETWORKS\n\nWhere multiple virtual machines are running on a single platform, virtualization provides a means for these VMs to communicate with each other and with other computers on the network—both physical and virtual—using standard networking protocols.\n\nThe guest operating system running in each virtual machine is presented with an emulation of a standard hardware platform. Among the hardware devices emulated will be one or more network adapters. The number of adapters and their connectivity can typically be configured within the hypervisor.\n\nWithin the virtual machine, the virtual adapter will look exactly like an ordinary NIC and will be configurable in exactly the same way. For example, protocols and services can be bound to it and it can be assigned an IP address.\n\nTypically, a hypervisor will implement network connectivity by means of one or more virtual switches (or vSwitches using VMware's terminology). These perform exactly the same function as Ethernet switches, except that they are implemented in software rather than hardware.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_402.png)\nSelecting which virtual switch the network adapter in a VM is connected to. Note that there is also a "Not connected" option. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)\n\nConnectivity between the virtual network adapters in the guest VMs and the virtual switches is configured via the hypervisor. This is analogous to connecting patch cables between real computers and real switches. Multiple virtual machines may be connected to the same virtual switch or to separate switches. The number of virtual switches supported varies from one hypervisor to another.\n\nIn this networking model, the virtual machines and the virtual switch can all be contained within a single hardware platform, so no actual network traffic is generated. Instead, data is moved from buffers in one virtual machine to another.\n\nIt is also possible to configure connectivity between the host computer's physical NIC and the virtual switches. This provides a bridge between the virtual switches within the host platform and the physical switches on the network, allowing frames to pass between physical and virtual machines and between the virtual machines and the host.\n\nFor example, in Microsoft's Hyper-V virtualization platform, three types of virtual switch can be created:\n• External—binds to the host's NIC to allow the VM to communicate on the physical network.\n• Internal—creates a switch that is usable only by VMs on the host and the host itself.\n• Private—creates a switch that is usable only by the VMs. They cannot use the switch to communicate with the host.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_403.png)\nConfiguring virtual switches in Microsoft's Hyper-V hypervisor. Most of the switches are private, which means that only the VMs can access them. The selected virtual switch can share the host network adapter, though, allowing communication between the VM and the host and allowing the VM to use the physical network to access the Internet. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)\n\nNote: When the VMs are allowed to interact with a "real" network, the host must support a high bandwidth, high availability network link. Any failure of the physical link will affect multiple VMs.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

VIRTUAL MACHINES\n\nIn principle, any type of operating system can be virtualized. This includes client OSs and server OSs. Note that some hypervisors have limited support for certain operating systems. For example, Hyper-V only provides support for particular distributions of Linux, though the situation is improving as the Hyper-V Linux Integration Services (LIS) drivers get added to the kernel of more Linux distributions.\n\nThere are also many different purposes for deploying a virtual platform. You can make a rough distinction between client-side virtualization, deployed to desktop-type machines, and server-side virtualization.\n\nCLIENT-SIDE VIRTUALIZATION\nClient-side virtualization refers to any solution designed to run on "ordinary" desktops or workstations. Each user will be interacting with the virtualization host directly. Desktop virtual platforms, usually based on some sort of guest OS hypervisor, are typically used for testing and development:\n• Virtual labs—create a research lab to analyze viruses, worms, and Trojans. As the malware is contained within the guest OS, it cannot infect the researcher's computer or network.\n• Support legacy software applications—if the host computers have been upgraded, software may not work well with the new operating system. In this scenario, the old OS can be installed as a VM and the application software accessed using the VM.\n• Development environment—test software applications under different operating systems and/or resource constraints.\n• Training—lab environments can be set up so that learners can practice using a live operating system and software without impacting the production environment. At the end of the lab, changes to the VM can be discarded so the original environment is available again for the next student to use.\n\nSERVER-SIDE VIRTUALIZATION\nFor server computers and applications, the main use of virtualization is better hardware utilization through server consolidation. A typical hardware server may have resource utilization of about 10%. This implies that you could pack the server computer with another 8 or 9 server software instances and obtain the same performance.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

SECURITY REQUIREMENTS\n\nLike any computing technology, deploying a virtualization solution comes with security challenges.\n\nGUEST OS SECURITY\nEach guest OS must be patched and protected against viruses and Trojans like any other OS. Patching each VM individually has performance implications, so in most environments, a new image would be patched and tested then deployed to the production environment. Running security software (antivirus and intrusion prevention) on each guest OS can cause performance problems. Solutions for running to "traditional" client-security applications through the host or hypervisor are being developed.\n\nNote: Ordinary antivirus software installed on the host will NOT detect viruses infecting the guest OS. Scanning the virtual disks of a guest OS from the host could cause serious performance problems.\n\nThe process of developing, testing, and deploying images brings about the first major security concern with the virtual platform itself. This is the problem of rogue VMs. A rogue VM is one that has been installed without authorization. The uncontrolled deployment of more and more VMs is referred to as VM sprawl. It's a lot easier to add a guest image to a server than it is to plug a new hardware server into the network!\n\nSystem management software can be deployed to detect rogue builds. More generally, the management procedures for developing and deploying machine images need to be tightly drafted and monitored. VMs should conform to an application-specific template with the minimum configuration needed to run that application (that is, not running unnecessary services). Images should not be developed or stored in any sort of environment where they could be infected by malware or have any sort of malicious code inserted. One of the biggest concerns here is of rogue developers or contractors installing backdoors or "logic bombs" within a machine image. The problem of criminal or disgruntled staff is obviously one that affects any sort of security environment, but concealing code within VM disk images is a bit easier to accomplish and has the potential to be much more destructive.\n\nHOST SECURITY\nAnother key security vulnerability in a virtual platform is that the host represents a single point of failure for multiple guest OS instances. For example, if the CPU on the host crashes, three or four guest VMs and the application services they are running will suddenly go offline.\n\nAnother point is that running the host at a constantly high level of utilization could decrease the Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) of its components. The MTBF is the number of hours the manufacturer expects that a component will run before experiencing some sort of hardware problem. If hardware is subjected to greater than expected loads, it may fail more often than expected.\n\nA successful Denial of Service (DoS) attack on a host machine, host OS, or hypervisor will cause far more damage to the server infrastructure than a DoS on a single web server. As an example, most hypervisors support a disk snapshots feature. Snapshots allow the user to revert to the saved image after making changes. This can be misused to perform DoS by causing the undo files to grow to the point where they consume all the available disk space on the host.\n\nHYPERVISOR SECURITY\nApart from ensuring the security of each guest OS and the host machine itself, a virtual platform introduces an additional layer for the attention of security analysts—that of the hypervisor. At the time of writing, there are few significant exploits, but hypervisor software is subject to patches and security advisories like any other software. As the use of virtual platforms grows, hypervisors will increasingly be the target of attacks.\n\nAnother issue is VM escaping. This refers to malware running on a guest OS jumping to another guest or to the host. As with any other type of software, it is vital to keep the hypervisor code up-to-date with patches for critical vulnerabilities.\ntag:C1 L7 TA

Activity 7-1\nDiscussing Client-Side Virtualization Configuration\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\nQuestion 1. What is a Type 2 hypervisor?\n\nAnswer 1. Hypervisor software that must be installed to a host OS. A Type 1 (or bare metal) hypervisor is installed directly on the host PC.\n\nQuestion 2. What is a guest OS?\n\nAnswer 2. An OS installed on a virtual machine running within the virtual environment.\n\nQuestion 3. What system resources are most important on a system designed to host multiple virtual machines?\n\nAnswer 3. The CPU must support virtualization extensions (and ideally be multi-processor or multicore), and there must be plenty of system memory and disk space.\n\nQuestion 4. What might you need to install to a guest OS to make full use of a hypervisor's features?\n\nAnswer 4. The drivers for the emulated hardware (often referred to as an extensions, additions, or integration components).\n\nQuestion 5. True or false? VMs can be networked together by using a virtual switch, which is implemented in software by the hypervisor.\n\nAnswer 5. True.\n\nQuestion 6. If users have access to virtualization tools, what network security controls might be required?\n\nAnswer 6. A VM needs to be subject to network access control and authorization, like any physical computer device. The VMs need to be checked to ensure they are not running malware, for instance.\n\nQuestion 7. If you are using a normal antivirus product to protect a VM from malware, should you install the A-V product on the host to scan the VM disk image or on the VM itself?\n\nAnswer 7. On the VM. The A-V software will not be able to scan the disk image for malware and may lock the file and cause performance problems while trying to perform the scan.\ntag:C1 L7 TA A7-1

Topic B\nCloud Computing Concepts\n\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1001-2.2 Compare and contrast common networking hardware devices.\n1001-4.1 Compare and contrast cloud computing concepts.\n\nOne of the latest trends in networking is to outsource part of an organization's IT infrastructure, platforms, storage, or services to a cloud service provider. In this topic, you will identify basic cloud concepts.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

CLOUD COMPUTING\n\nThe cloud has lots of different definitions but generally refers to any sort of IT infrastructure provided to the end user where the end user is not aware of or\nresponsible for any details of the procurement, implementation, or management of\nthe infrastructure. Its internal workings are a "cloud"; the end user is only interested in and pays for the services provided by the cloud.\n\nThe National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) created a standardized definition for cloud computing. This allows consumers to more easily compare services  and deployment models from different vendors if they all use the same definition.\n\nThe NIST definition states: “Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.” (https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf, section 2.)\n\nNIST identifies five characteristics that are essential in defining something as being cloud computing. These are defined in the following table.\n\nCharacteristic: Description\n\nOn-demand self service: Consumers can provision services on the fly without interaction with service provider personnel.\n\nBroad network access: Services are available over networks using standard clients, including workstations, laptops, tablets, and smart phones.\n\nResource pooling: Multiple customers share the service provider's resources in a multi-tenant model. Resources are dynamically assigned as they are needed without regard to where the customer or the resource are located. However, a customer can request resources from a specific location at the country, state, or data-center level. Resources include memory, storage, processing, and network bandwidth.\n\nRapid elasticity: Resources are automatically provisioned to scale up or down as\nresources are required by the customer.\n\nMeasured service: Resources are measured through metering on a per use basis. The metering measurement is based on the type of resource such as storage, processing, bandwidth, or active users. The metering mechanism should be accessible to the customer via a reporting dashboard, providing complete transparency in usage and billing.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

BENEFITS OF CLOUD COMPUTING\n\nThere are many benefits to using cloud computing. This includes savings in the cost of infrastructure and support, energy cost savings, rapid deployment, and allowing the customer to make the choices that make the most sense for their organization.\n\nOne of the most often cited benefits of implementing cloud computing is that the cloud provides rapid elasticity. This means that the cloud can scale quickly to meet peak demand. For example, a company may operate a single web server instance for most of the year, but provision additional instances for the busy Christmas period and then release them again in the New Year.\n\nThis example also illustrates the principles of on-demand and pay-per-use—key features of a cloud service (as opposed to a hosted service). On-demand implies that the customer can initiate service requests and that the cloud provider can respond to them immediately. This feature of cloud service is useful for project-based needs, giving the project members access to the cloud services for the duration of the project, and then releasing the cloud services back to the hosting provider when the project is finished. This way, the organization is only paying for the services for the duration of the project.\n\nThe provider's ability to control a customer's use of resources through metering is referred to as measured service. The customer is paying for the CPU, memory, disk, and network bandwidth resources they are actually consuming rather than paying a monthly fee for a particular service level.\n\nIn order to respond quickly to changing customer demands, cloud providers must be able to provision resources quickly. This is achieved through resource pooling and virtualization. Resource pooling means that the hardware making up the cloud provider's data center is not dedicated to or reserved for a particular customer account. The layers of virtualization used in the cloud architecture allow the provider to provision more CPU, memory, disk, or network resources using management software, rather than (for instance) having to go to the data center floor, unplug a server, add a memory module, and reboot.\n\nFlexibility is a key advantage of cloud computing. However, the implications for data risk must be well understood when moving data between private and public storage environments. You need to be aware that any point from the server to the end user could be compromised if proper security measures are not taken and adhered to when transferring data over public and private networks.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

COMMON CLOUD MODELS\n\nIn most cases, the cloud (that is, the hardware and/or software hosting the service) will be off-site relative to the organization's users, who will require an Internet link to access the cloud services. There can be different ownership and access arrangements for clouds, which can be broadly categorized as described in the following table.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/table_core_1_409.png)\n\nCloud Model | Description\nPublic or multi-tenant: This model is hosted by a third-party and shared with other subscribers. This is what many people understand by cloud computing. As a shared resource, there are risks regarding performance and security.\n\nHosted private: This model is hosted by a third-party for the exclusive use of one organization. This is more secure and can guarantee a better level of performance, but is correspondingly more expensive. The OpenStack project (openstack.org) is one example of a technology you could use to implement your own cloud computing infrastructure.\n\nPrivate: In this model, the cloud infrastructure is completely private to and owned by the organization. In this case, there is likely to be one business unit dedicated to managing the cloud while other business units make use of it.\n\nThis type of cloud could be on-site or off-site relative to the other business units. An on-site link can obviously deliver better performance and is less likely to be subject to outages (loss of an Internet link, for instance). On the other hand, a dedicated off-site facility may provide better shared access for multiple users in different locations.\n\nCommunity: With this model, several organizations share the costs of either a hosted private or fully private cloud.\n\nHybrid: There will also be cloud computing solutions that implement some sort of hybrid public/private/community/hosted/on-site/off-site solution. For example, a travel organization may run a sales website for most of the year using a private cloud but "break out" the solution to a public cloud at times when much higher utilization is forecast. Google’s Gov Cloud is another example. This cloud can be used by government branches within the U.S., but it is not available to consumers or businesses.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL SHARED RESOURCES\n\nAll networks provide a pool of shared resources for use by servers and clients. For example, file servers can provide disk storage resources to client computers in the form of shared folders. Servers themselves can use shared disk storage in the form of Storage Area Networks (SANs). Use of virtualization and hybrid cloud computing solutions allows these shared resources to be provisioned using a mixture of internally owned assets and externally provisioned assets.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

CLOUD SERVICE OPTIONS\n\nAs well as the ownership model (public, private, hybrid, or community), cloud services are often differentiated on the level of sophistication provided. These models are referred to as Something as a Service (*aaS), where the   can refer to infrastructure, network, platform, or software.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/table_core_1_410.png)\n\nService Type: Description\n\nIaaS: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is a means of provisioning IT resources such as servers, load balancers, and Storage Area Network (SAN) components quickly. Rather than purchase these components and the Internet links they require, you rent them on an as-needed basis from the service provider's data center. In an IaaS arrangement, you are typically billed based on the resources you consume, much like a utility company bills you for the amount of electricity you use.\n\nIaaS is a bare bones service offering. You will need to configure the components and build the platform on top. Examples of IaaS include Rackspace’s CloudServers offering, in which you rent a virtual server running an operating system of your choice. You then install the applications you need onto that virtual server. Other examples include Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) service and Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3).\n\nSaaS: Software as a Service (SaaS) is a different model of provisioning software applications. Rather than purchasing software licenses for a given number of seats, a business would access software hosted on a supplier's servers on a pay-as-you-go or lease arrangement (on-demand). Virtual infrastructure allows developers to provision on-demand applications much more quickly than previously. The applications can be developed and tested within the cloud without the need to test and deploy on client computers.\n\nPerhaps the most well-known SaaS example is the Salesforce Customer Relationship Management (CRM) service. Other notable SaaS examples are the Zoho suite of applications, Google's applications suite, and Microsoft’s Office 365 suite.\n\nPaaS: provides resources somewhere between SaaS and IaaS. A typical PaaS solution would provide servers and storage network infrastructure, but also provide a multi-tier web application/database platform on top, in contrast to Infrastructure as a Service. This platform might be based on Oracle  or MS SQL or PHP and MySQL™.\n\nAs distinct from SaaS, though, this platform would not be configured to actually do anything. Your own developers would have to create the software, such as the CRM or e-commerce application, that runs using the platform.\n\nThe service provider would be responsible for the integrity and availability of the platform components, but you would be responsible for the security of the application you created on the platform. An example is Rackspace's CloudSites offering, in which you rent a virtual web server and associated systems such as a database or email server. Amazon's Relational Database Service (RDS) enables you to rent fully configured MySQL and Oracle database servers.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/table_core_1_411.png)\nAmazon's EC2 offers IaaS (Linux or Windows machine images) and PaaS (database and application development environments).\ntag:C1 L7 TB

VIRTUAL DESKTOPS\n\nVirtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) refers to using a VM as a means of provisioning corporate desktops. In a typical VDI, desktop computers are replaced by low\npower thin client computers.\n\nWhen the thin client starts, it boots a minimal OS, allowing the user to log on to a VM stored on the company server or cloud infrastructure. The user makes a connection to the VM using some sort of remote desktop protocol (Microsoft Remote Desktop or Citrix ICA, for instance). The thin client has to find the correct image and use an appropriate authentication mechanism. There may be a 1:1 mapping based on machine name or IP address, or the process of finding an image may be handled by a connection broker.\n\nAll application processing and data storage in the Virtual Desktop Environment (VDE) or workspace is performed by the server. The thin client computer only has to be powerful enough to display the screen image, play audio, and transfer mouse, key commands and video, and audio information over the network. All data is stored on the server or in the cloud so it is easier to back up and the desktop VMs are easier to support and troubleshoot. They are better locked against unsecure user practices because any changes to the VM can easily be overwritten from the template image. With VDI, it is also easier for a company to completely offload their IT infrastructure to a third-party services company.\n\nThe main disadvantage is that in the event of a failure in the server and network infrastructure, users have no local processing ability. This can mean that downtime events may be more costly in terms of lost productivity.\n\nVIRTUAL NIC\nA virtual machine includes a virtual NIC. However, there will also need to be a physical NIC to get the thin client computer onto the network. These adapters do not have to connect to the same network. The physical NIC might be isolated to a network provisioning the VDI solution. The virtual NIC available from the virtual desktop would connect to the corporate data network and (via the organization's routers) to the Internet.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

CLOUD-BASED APPLICATIONS\n\nApplication virtualization is a more limited type of VDI. Rather than run the whole client desktop as a virtual platform, the client either accesses a particular application hosted on a server or streams the application from the server to the client for local processing. This enables programmers and application administrators to ensure that the application used by clients is always updated with the latest code.\n\nMost application virtualization solutions are based on Citrix XenApp. Microsoft has developed an App-V product within its Windows Server range. VMware has the ThinApp product.\n\nOFF-SITE EMAIL APPLICATIONS\nTraditionally, most organizations set up and configured their own email server. With cloud computing, the email server can be another off-site service. It might be something like Gmail™ or Yahoo!  Mail. It also might be part of a Office 365 Business Premium, which includes the Exchange email server service. Using an off-site email application to access these off-site email services makes it easier for users to access their mail from multiple devices and locations such as their laptop, desktop, tablet, and smart phone. The mailbox is synchronized so that no matter which device the mail is accessed from, the account accurately indicates which messages have been read, unread, deleted, or moved to other folders.\n\nCLOUD FILE STORAGE\nA variety of cloud file storage services are available. These services might be integrated into the Windows File Explorer, or they might have their own dedicated synchronization app, or both. OneDrive  is one cloud file storage service. All Office 365 users receive dedicated storage space for their account. Personal and business OneDrive accounts are separate, but can be linked. OneDrive is integrated into the Windows File Explorer and also has a dedicated OneDrive app that can be installed. OneDrive can also be accessed through a browser. Dropbox™ is another file storage service that can be accessed in the same types of ways. Other cloud file storage services that can be synchronized between all of a user's devices include iCloud from Apple  and Google Drive™.\n\nIn addition to allowing a single user to synchronize content between all of their own devices, the user can also share the cloud storage content with other users. In this case, multiple users can simultaneously access the content to work collaboratively, or they can access it at different times. Each user's changes are typically marked with a flag or color highlighting to indicate who made changes to what content.\n\nVIRTUAL APPLICATION STREAMING\nWhen virtual application streaming is implemented, a small piece of the application is typically installed on the end user device. This is just enough of the application for the system to recognize that the application is available to the user. When the user accesses the application, additional portions of the application code are downloaded to the device. Many users only use a small portion of the features available in an application. By downloading only the portions that are being used, the streaming goes quickly, making the user unaware in most cases that the application is being streamed. If additional features are accessed from the application menu, the supporting code for those features is then downloaded. The administrator can configure the streaming application to remove all of the downloaded code, or they can configure it to retain what has been downloaded so it will be faster to load the application the next time the user wants to use it.\n\nCLIENT PLATFORMS\nCloud-based applications can often be deployed for smart cell phones and tablets as well as for laptops and desktops. Typically, the application uses the same base code for all of these platforms, but has additional features that are better supported on laptops and desktops that would be difficult to implement with small screen size, less RAM, and less storage space on a smart phone or tablet. In other instances, the features are the same across all client platforms; it all depends on the features and purpose of the application. By streaming an application or running it in the cloud, much of the memory and storage requirements are eliminated on the client.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

CONTAINER VIRTUALIZATION\n\nContainer virtualization dispenses with the idea of a hypervisor and instead enforces resource separation at the operating system level. The OS defines isolated containers for each user instance to run in. Each container is allocated CPU and memory resources, but the processes all run through the native OS kernel.\n\nThese containers may run slightly different OS distributions but cannot run guest OSs of different types (you could not run Windows or Ubuntu  in a RedHat  Linux  container, for instance). Alternatively, the containers might run separate application processes, in which case the variables and libraries required by the application process are added to the container.\n\nOne of the best-known container virtualization products is Docker (docker.com). Containerization is also being widely used to implement corporate workspaces on mobile devices.\n\n(https://4sorcero.s3.amazonaws.com/byteback/core_1/fig_core_1_413.png)\nComparison of Containers versus Virtual Machines.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

CLOUD-BASED NETWORK CONTROLLERS\n\nWhen you deploy a network using a mixture of local and cloud-based resources, potentially using different cloud providers, it can be difficult to obtain "visibility" of the whole network from a single management and monitoring interface. For example, you might have an overall network where clients are using multiple wired and wireless local networks to connect, there might be use of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), some of the organization's servers might be privately controlled, but others might be hosted in the cloud, and so on.\n\nA cloud-based network controller allows you to register and monitor some (or perhaps all) of these different component networks, clients, and servers. Cloud-based network controllers (and network controllers generally) depend on Software Defined Networking (SDN) . SDN means that network access devices—access points, switches, routers, and firewalls—can be configured using software programs and scripts.\ntag:C1 L7 TB

Activity 7-2\nDiscussing Cloud Computing Concepts\n\nSCENARIO\nThere has been a lot of talk around the office recently about cloud services. You have heard some other people touting this as the only way to go for storage. In order to be sure of yourself before you join in these conversations, you wrote down some questions and did a little research about them to make sure you know what you are talking about.\n\nQuestion 1. How do the five components of cloud computing defined by the NIST work together to provide users with cloud computing services?\n\nAnswer 1. Resource allocation is provided through rapid elasticity and resource pooling. Resource allocation is requested through on-demand self-service. Broad network access makes the resources available to the user. Measured service enables the provider to meter customer usage and bill the customer accordingly.\n\nQuestion 2. Which type of cloud would your organization be likely to use?\n\nAnswer 2. Answers will vary. Depending on how much control you need over the storage or services provided through the cloud, you might select a private cloud solution as the most secure, and a community cloud solution as the least secure.\n\nQuestion 3. A cloud service should exhibit rapid elasticity, allow users to access resources on-demand, and pay on a per-use basis. What type of service should the provider run to enable these features?\n\nAnswer 3. A measured service with the resources to cope with changing demands.\n\nQuestion 4. A company has contracted the use of a remote data center to offer exclusive access to Platform as a Service resources to its internal business users. How would such a cloud solution be classed?\n\nAnswer 4. Offsite hosted private.\n\nQuestion 5. When users connect to the network, they use a basic hardware terminal to access a desktop hosted on a virtualization server. What type of infrastructure is being deployed?\n\nAnswer 5. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI).\ntag:C1 L7 TB A7-3

Summary\nIn this lesson, you examined implementation requirements for client virtualization and cloud computing. The ability to support these and other emerging technologies is very likely to have an impact on the day-to-day responsibilities of an A+ technician.\n\nQuestion 1. What types of client-side virtualization technologies does your organization use?\n\nAnswer 1. Answers will vary, but might include the use of virtual machines to support legacy applications or for training purposes.\n\nQuestion 2. What type of cloud computing does your organization use? What other services might you recommend be implemented?\n\nAnswer 2. Answers will vary, but might include SaaS offerings such as Salesforce Sales Cloud or Office 365. You might suggest infrastructure services be investigated if your organization tends to have fluctuating data storage needs.\ntag:C1 L7 SUMMARY
