Lesson 6\nSecurity Concepts\n\nLESSON INTRODUCTION\n\nSo far in this course, you have installed and configured PC hardware and software and network devices. Another facet of a CompTIA® A¥ technician's duties involves protecting organizational computing assets from attacks. In this lesson, you will identify security threats and vulnerabilities, plus some of the logical and physical controls used to mitigate them.\n\nIn today's work environment, cybersecurity is everyone's responsibility. As an A+ technician, you are in the position to identify potential security issues before they become big problems. By identifying security threats and vulnerabilities, as well as some of the controls that can counteract them, you can help keep your organization's computing resources safe from unauthorized access.\ntag:C2 L6

LESSON OBJECTIVES\n\nIn this lesson, you will:\n• Describe logical security concepts.\n• Describe physical security threats and vulnerabilities.\n• Describe physical security controls.\nThe Official CompTiA® A+® Core 2 Student Guide (Exam 220-1002)\ntag:C2 L6

Topic A\nLogical Security Concepts\n\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1002-2.2 Explain logical security concepts.\n1002-2.7 Given a scenario, implement security best practices to secure a workstation.\n\nLogical security refers to the idea that any information or data that is created, stored, and transmitted in digital form is secured to the desired level. This concept applies to ‘many components of the digital world, such as the Internet, cloud-based computing, networks, mobile devices, tablets, laptops, and standard desktop computers.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

SECURITY BASICS\n\nSecurity is the practice of controlling access to something (a resource). Security is always balanced against accessibility; restricting access makes a resource better protected but also less usable. Secure information has three properties, often referred to as the CIA triad:\n\n• Confidentiality—this means that certain information should only be known to certain people.\n\n• Integrity—this means that the data is stored and transferred as intended and that any modification is authorized.\n\n• Availability—this means that information is accessible to those authorized to view or modify it.\n\nSecurity policies ensure that an organization has evaluated the risks it faces and has putin place controls to mitigate those risks. Making a system more secure is also referred to as hardening it. Different security policies should cover every aspect of an organization's use of computer and network technologies, from procurement and change control to acceptable use.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

SECURITY CONTROLS\n\nSecurity controls are safeguards or prevention methods to avoid, counteract, or minimize security risks relating to personal or company property. For example, a firewall is a type of security control because it controls network communications by allowing only traffic that has specifically been permitted by a system administrator.\n\nSecurity controls can be classified by several criteria, such as by the time that they act, relative to a security incident, according to their nature, or by people, technology, and operations/processes. There are different classification schemes, but one way to understand the types of security controls is to consider the following classes:\n\n• Physical controls such as fences, doors, locks, and fire extinguishers.\n\n• Procedural controls such as incident response processes, management oversight, security awareness, and training.\n\n• Logical controls such as user authentication (login) and software-based access controls, anti-virus software, and firewalls.\n\n• Legal and regulatory or compliance controls such as privacy laws, policies, and clauses.\n\nLOGICAL SECURITY CONTROLS\nLogical security refers to controls implemented in software to create an access control system. The overall operation of an access control system is usually described in terms of three functions, referred to as the AAA triad:\n\n• Authentication means one or more methods of proving that a user is who she/he says she/he is.\n\n• Authorization means creating one or more barriers around the resource such that only authenticated users can gain access. Each resource has an access control list specifying what users can do. Resources often have different access levels; for example, being able to read a file or being able to read and edit it.\n\n• Accounting means recording when and by whom a resource was accessed.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

IMPLICIT DENY AND LEAST PRIVILEGE\n\nLogical security is founded on the principle of implicit deny. Implicit deny means that unless there is a rule specifying that access should be granted, any request for access is denied. This level of minimal access includes facilities, computing hardware, software, and information.\n\nThis principle can be seen clearly in firewall policies. A firewall filters access requests using a set of rules. The rules are processed in order from top-to-bottom. If a request does not fit any of the rules, it is handled by the last (default) rule, which is to refuse the request.\n\nA complementary principle is that of least privilege. This means that a user should be granted rights necessary to perform their job and no more.\n\nNote: These principles apply equally to users (people) and software processes. Much software is written without regard to the principles of implicit deny and least privilege, making it less secure than it should be.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

ENCRYPTION\n\nMany logical security controls depend to some extent on the use of encryption technologies. Encryption is an ancient technique for hiding information. Someone obtaining an encrypted document cannot understand that information unless they possesses a key. The use of encryption allows sensitive data to travel across a public network, such as the Internet, and remain private. if the data packets were intercepted and examined, the content would be unreadable.\n\nThe use of encryption and other digital security techniques provides users with three important security requirements on computer networks: confidentiality, integrity, and authentication. There are three principal types of cryptographic technology: symmetric encryption, asymmetric encryption, and cryptographic hashing, These all have different roles in achieving the goals of confidentiality, integrity, and/or authentication. Often two or more of these three different types are used together in the same product or technology.\n\nSYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION\nIn symmetric encryption, a single secret key is used to both encrypt and decrypt data. The secret key is so-called because it must be kept secret. If the key is lost or stolen, the security is breached.\n\nNote: Symmetric encryption is also referred to as single-key or prvate-key. Note that “private key" is also used to refer to part of the PKI process (discussed shortly), so take care not to confuse the two uses.\n\nThe main problem with symmetric encryption is secure distribution and storage of the key. This problem becomes exponentially greater the more widespread the key's, distribution needs to be. The main advantage is speed, as symmetric key encryption is less processor intensive than asymmetric encryption.\n\nSymmetric encryption is used to encode data for storage or transmission over a network. The most widely used symmetric encryption technology (or cipher) is the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Older ciphers such as Data Encryptions Standard (DES/SDES) and Rivest Cipher (RC) have known weaknesses that make them less. suitable for use in modern security systems.\n\nOne of the principal measures of the security of an encryption cipher is the size of the key. Early ciphers used between 32- and 64-bit keys. Currently, 1024-bit keys would be selected for general use, with larger keys required for highly sensitive data. The larger the key, however, the more processing is required to perform encryption and decryption.\n\nASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION\nIn asymmetric encryption, if a public key is used to encrypt data, only a mathematically related private key can be used to decrypt it. The private key must be kept a secret, known only to a single subject (user or computer). The public key can be widely and safely distributed to anyone with whom the subject wants to communicate, because the private key cannot be derived from the public key. Also, the public key cannot be used to decrypt a message that it has just encrypted.\n\nNote: A key pair can be used the other way around. If the private key is used to encrypt something, only the public key can then decrypt it. The point is that one type of key cannot reverse the operation it has just performed.\n\nAsymmetric encryption is mostly used for authentication technologies, such as digital certificates and digital signatures, and key exchange. Key exchange is where two hosts need to know the same symmetric encryption key without any other host finding out what it is. Symmetric encryption is much faster than asymmetric, so it is often used to protect the actual data exchange in a session. Asymmetric encryption is more complex, taking longer for a computer to process, and so typically only used on small amounts of data, such as the authentication process to set up the session.\n\nMost asymmetric encryption technologies use the RSA cipher, named after its designers Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman.\n\nCRYPTOGRAPHIC HASHES\nA hash is a short representation of data. A hash function takes a variable-length string (text) as input and produces a fixed-length value (32-bit, for instance) as output. A cryptographic hash makes it impossible to recover the original string from the hash value. This technique can be used to prove that a message has not been tampered with (integrity). For example, when creating a digital signature, the sender computes a cryptographic hash of the message and then encrypts the hash with his or her private key. When the recipient receives the message and decrypts the hash, the recipient computes its own hash of the message and compares the two values to confirm they match. Cryptographic hashes are also used for secure storage of data where the original meaning does not have to be recovered (passwords for instance).\n\nTwo of the most commonly used cryptographic hash algorithms are Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-1 and SHA-2) and Message Digest (MD5). MD5 is the older algorithm and is gradually being phased out of use.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

PKI AND CERTIFICATES\n\nAsymmetric encryption is an important part of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). PKI is a solution to the problem of authenticating subjects on public networks. Under PKI, users or server computers are validated by a Certificate Authority (CA), which issues the subject a digital certificate. The digital certificate contains a public key associated with the subject embedded in it. The certificate has also been signed by the CA, guaranteeing its validity. Therefore, if a client trusts the signing CA, they can also trust the user or server presenting the certificate.\n\nThe client can then send the server (comptia.org, for example) data (their credit card details, for example) encrypted using the public key, safe in the knowledge that only that particular server will be able to decrypt it (using its private key). A similar technique can be used to encrypt the contents of emails. The sender uses the recipient's public key to encrypt the data with the assurance that only the linked private key can be used to decrypt the data again. PKI can also be used by mobile applications to encrypt any data sent between the client and the server.\n\nDigital certificates are also used for secure authentication to computer networks. The certificate is stored with the private key on a smart card hardware token. To authenticate, the card provides the certificate to the authentication server, which checks that it is valid and trusted. It then uses the public key in the certificate to issue an encrypted challenge to the user. The smart card should be able to decrypt this challenge using the private key and send an appropriate response.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

EXECUTION CONTROL\n\nAuthentication and authorization gives subjects the right to sign on to a computer and network and (potentially) to make changes to the system configuration. This places a certain amount of trust in the user to exercise those rights responsibly. Users can act maliciously, though, or could be tricked into an adverse action. Execution control refers to logical security technologies designed to prevent malicious software from running on a host. Execution control can establish a security system that does not entirely depend on the good behavior of individual users.\n\nTRUSTED/UNTRUSTED SOFTWARE SOURCES\nTo prevent the spread of malware such as Trojans, it is necessary to restrict the ability of users to run unapproved program code, especially code that can modify the OS, such as an application installer. Windows uses the system of Administrator and Standard user accounts, along with User Account Control (UAC) and system policies, to enforce these restrictions.\n\nDevelopers of Windows applications can use digital certificates to perform code signing and prove the authenticity and integrity of an installer package. Linux” also prompts when you attempt to install untrusted software. Software is signed with a cryptographic key. Packages need the public key for the repository in order to install the software. When prompted that you are installing untrusted software, you can either respond that you want to install it anyway or cancel the installation.\n\nMobile OS vendors use this “walled garden" model of software distribution as well. Apps are distributed from an approved store, such as Apple's App Store or the  \dows Store. The vendor's store policies and procedures are supposed to prevent any Trojan-like apps from being published.\n\nThere are also third-party network management suites to enforce application control. This means configuring blacklists of unapproved software (allowing anything else) or whitelists of approved software (denying anything else).\n\nDISABLE AutoRun\nOne of the problems with legacy versions of Windows is that when an optical disk is inserted or USB or network drive is attached, Windows would automatically run commands defined in an autorun. inf file stored in the root of the drive. A typical autorun.inf would define an icon for a disk and the path to a setup file. This could lead to malware being able to install itself automatically.\n\nIn modern versions of Windows, an AutoPlay dialog box is shown prompting the user  to take a particular action, AutoPlay settings can be configured via a drive's property dialog box. Also, UAC will require the user to explicitly allow any executable code to run, There is a Control Panel applet to configure default AutoPlay actions.\n\n[file:///fig-382.png]\nConfiguring AutoPlay in Windows 7. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)\n\nANTI-VIRUS/ANTI-MALWARE\nAnti-virus (A-V) is software that can detect malware and prevent it from executing. The primary means of detection is to use a database of known virus patterns, called definitions, signatures, or patterns. Another technique is to use heuristic identification. "Heuristic" means that the software uses knowledge of the sort of things that viruses do to try to spot (and block) virus-like behavior. Most anti-virus software is better described as anti-malware, as it can detect software threats that are not technically virus-like, including spyware, Trojans, rootkits, and ransomware. It is critical to ensure that the security software is updated regularly.\n\nPATCH MANAGEMENT\nIt Is important to apply critical and security updates for OS and application software. Failing to keep operating systems and software applications up-to-date can cause anything from graphical corruptions when using new video drivers to complete system crashes and vulnerability to malware. That said, there are two approaches to applying updates:\n\n• Apply all the latest patches to ensure the system is as secure as possible against attacks against flaws in the software.\n\n• Only apply a patch if it solves a particular problem being experienced.\n\nThe second approach obviously requires more work, as you need to keep up-to-date with security bulletins. However, it is well recognized that updates can cause problems, especially with software application compatibility. Best practice is to test updates on a non-production system before rolling them out.\n\nNote: To check the current build of Windows, run winver. To check the version number of a particular file, right-click and select Properties.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

NAC\n\nFirewalls are principally deployed to manage access between networks. They control communications by blocking packets based on access rules permitting or denying certain combinations of IP addresses and network ports, or other filtering criteria.\n\nFirewalls cannot control whether a device can connect to a network in the first place. Defense in depth, or endpoint security, refers to controls that monitor the security of a network “behind” the perimeter firewall. Network Access Control (NAC) allows administrators to devise policies or profiles describing a minimum security configuration that devices must meet to be granted network access. This is called a health policy. Typical policies check things such as malware infection, firmware and 5 patch level, personal firewall status, and the presence of up-to-date virus definitions, A solution may also be to scan the registry or perform file signature verification. The health policy is defined on a NAC management server along with reporting and configuration tools.\n\nPHYSICAL PORT SECURITY\nWith wired ports, access to the physical switch ports and switch hardware should be restricted to authorized staff, using a secure server room and/or lockable hardware cabinets. To prevent the attachment of unauthorized client devices, a switch port can be disabled using the management software or the patch cable can be physically removed from the port. Completely disabling ports in this way can introduce a lot of. administrative overhead and scope for error. Also, it doesn’t provide complete protection as an attacker could unplug a device from an enabled port and connect their own laptop. Consequently, more sophisticated methods of ensuring port security have been developed.\n\nMAC ADDRESS FILTERING\nConfiguring MAC filtering on a switch means defining which MAC addresses are allowed to connect to a particular port. This can be done by creating a list of valid MAC addresses or by specifying a limit to the number of permitted addresses. For example, if port security is enabled with a maximum of two MAC addresses, the switch will record the first two MACs to connect to that port but then drop any traffic from machines with different network adapter IDs that try to connect.\n\nMany devices also support whitelisting and/or blacklisting of MAC addresses. A MAC address added to a whitelist is permitted to connect to any port, whereas a MAC address on a blacklist is prohibited from connecting to any port.\n\nPORT SECURITY / IEEE 802.1X\nThe IEEE 802.1X standard defines a Port-based Network Access Control (PNAC) mechanism. PNAC means that the switch (or router) performs some sort of authentication of the attached device before activating the port.\n\nUnder 802.1X, the device requesting access is the supplicant. The switch, referred to as the authenticator, enables the Extensible Authentic n Protocol over LAN (EAPoL) protocol only and waits for the device to supply authentication data. Using.\n\nEAP, this data could be a simple username/password (EAP-MDS) or could involve using digital certificate or token. The authenticator passes this data to an authenticating server, which checks the credentials and grants or denies access.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

MDM\n\nMobile Device Management (MDM) is a class of management software designed to apply security policies to the use of mobile devices in the enterprise. This software can be used to manage enterprise-owned devices as well as Bring Your Own Device (Byop).\n\nThe core functionality of these suites is similar to Network Access Control (NAC) solutions. The management software logs the use of a device on the network and determines whether to allow it to connect or not, based on administrator-set parameters. When the device is enrolled with the management software, it can be configured with policies to allow or restrict use of apps, corporate data, and built-in functions, such as a video camera or microphone.\n\n[file:///fig-384.png]\nConfiguring iOS device enrollment in Microsoft's Intune Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM) suite. Used with permission from Microsoft.\ntag:C2 L6 TA

VPN\n\nAs well as allowing hosts to connect over wired or wireless local connections, most networks have to allow devices to connect remotely, to support home workers, field workers, branch offices, partners, suppliers, and customers. A remote connection is obviously easier for external attackers to try to exploit than a local one, so remote access must be subject to stringent security policies and controls.\n\nVirtual Private Network (VPN) connects the components and resources of two (private) networks over another (public) network. A VPN isa "tunnel" through the Internet (or any other public network). It uses special connection protocols and encryption technology to ensure that the tunnel is secure and the user is properly authenticated. Once the connection has been established, to all intents and purposes, the remote computer becomes part of the local network (though it is still restricted by the bandwidth available over the WAN link).\n\nWith a VPN, TCP/IP communications are encrypted and then packaged within another TCP/IP packet stream. The VPN hardware or software can encrypt just the underlying data in a packet or the entire packet itself before wrapping it in another IP packet for delivery. If'a packet on the public network is intercepted along the way, the encrypted contents cannot be read by a hacker. Such encryption of data or packets is typically implemented by using a protocol suite called Internet Protocol Security (IPSec).\n\nA remote access request is only granted if the user authenticates correctly and the account has been given remote (or "dial-in") permission. The client device could also be subject to NAC policy checks before it is allowed to fully join the VPN.

Activity 6-1\nDiscussing Logical Security Concepts\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\n1. Confidentiality and integrity are two important properties of information stored in a secure retrieval system. What is the third property?\n\n2. While you are assigning privileges to the accounting department in your organization, Cindy, a human resource administrative assistant, insists that she needs access to the employee records database so that she can fulfill change of address requests from employees. After checking with her manager and referring to the organization's access control security policy, Cindy's job role does not fall into the authorized category for access to that database. What security concept is being practiced in this scenario?\n\n3. What distinguishes a cryptographic hash from the output of an encryption algorithm?\n\n4. What type of cryptographic algorithm is AES?\n\n5, What type of cryptographic key is delivered in a digital certificate?\n\n6. John brought in the new tablet he just purchased and tried to connect to the corporate network. He knows the SSID of the wireless network and the password used to access the wireless network. He was denied access, and a warning message was displayed that he must contact the IT Department immediately.  What happened and why did he receive the message?\n\n7. What type of network access is facilitated by VPN?\ntag:C2 L6 TA A6-1

Topic B\nThreats and Vulnerabilities\n\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n\nIn this topic, you will distinguish the concepts of threats, vulnerabilities, and controls. By identifying common security threats and vulnerabilities, you will be better equipped to suggest or implement the most effective counteractive measures.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

VULNERABILITIES, THREATS, AND RISKS\n\nIn IT security, it is important to distinguish between the concepts of vulnerability, threat, and risk:\n\n• Vulnerability—a weakness that could be triggered accidentally or exploited intentionally to cause a security breach.\n\n• Threat—the potential for a threat agent or threat actor (something or someone that may trigger a vulnerability accidentally or exploit it intentionally) to “exercise” a vulnerability (that is, to breach security). The path or tool used by the threat actor can be referred to as the threat vector.\n\n• Risk—the likelihood and impact (or consequence) of a threat actor exercising a vulnerability.\n\nTo understand network security, you need to understand the types of threats that a network is exposed to and how vulnerabilities can be exploited to launch actual attacks.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

SOCIAL ENGINEERING THREATS\n\nMuch of the focus in computer security is in deterring malicious external and insider threats. Attackers can use a diverse range of techniques to compromise a security system. A prerequisite of many types of attack is to obtain information about the security system. Social engineering refers to means of getting users to reveal this kind of confidential information or allowing some sort of access to the organization that should not have been authorized. A social engineering attack uses deception and trickery to convince unsuspecting users to provide sensitive data or to violate security guidelines, Social engineering is often a precursor to another type of attack.\n\nIt Is also important to note that gaining access to a network is often based on a series of small steps rather than a single large step. That is, knowing the email address of an employee allows an attacker to search for facts about that user online. This might help target the user with fake messages. A message might be convincing enough to persuade the user to reveal some confidential information or install some malware. The malware allows the attacker to access the network and try to discover the ID of a more privileged account or the location of important data files.\n\nBecause these attacks depend on human factors rather than on technology, their symptoms can be vague and hard to identify. Social engineering attacks can come in a variety of methods: in person, through email, or over the phone. Social engineering typically takes advantage of users who are not technically knowledgeable, but it can also be directed against technical support staff if the attacker pretends to be a user who needs help.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

COMMON SOCIAL ENGINEERING EXPLOITS\n\nPreventing social engineering attacks requires an awareness of the most common forms of social engineering exploits.\n\nIMPERSONATION\nImpersonation (pretending to be someone else) is one of the basic social engine techniques. The classic impersonation attack is for an attacker to phone into a department, claim they have to adjust something on the user's system remotely, and get the user to reveal their password.\n\nAttackers will generally try one of the following methods to make an impersonation attack convincing:\n\n• Intimidate their target by pretending to be someone senior in rank.\n\n• Intimidate the target by using spurious technical arguments and jargon or alarm. them with a hoax\n\n• Coax the target by engaging with them in and putting them at their ease.\n\n[file:///fig-389.png]\nDo you really know who's on the other end of the line? (Photo by Uros Jovicic on Unsplash.)\n\nPHISHING AND SPEAR PHISHING\nPhishing is a combination of social engineering and spoofing (disguising one computer resource as another). The attacker sets up a spoof website to imitate a target bank or ecommerce provider's secure website, The attacker then emails users of the genuine website informing them that their account must be updated, supplying a disguised link that actually leads to their spoofed site. When the user authenticates with the spoofed site, their log on details are captured. Another technique is to spawn a "pop-up" window when a user visits a genuine site to try to trick them into entering their credentials through the pop-up.\n\nSpear phishing refers to a phishing scam where the attacker has some information that makes the target more likely to be fooled by the attack. The attacker might know the name of a document that the target is editing, for instance, and send a malicious copy, or the phishing email might show that the attacker knows the recipient's full name, job title, telephone number, or other details that help to convince the target that the communication is genuine.\n\nPHARMING\nPharming is another means of redirecting users from a legitimate website to a malicious one. Rather than using social engineering techniques to trick the user, however, pharming relies on corrupting the way the victim's computer performs Internet name resolution, so that they are redirected from the genuine site to the malicious one. For example, if mybank.com should point to the IP address w.xy.z, a pharming attack would corrupt the name resolution process to make it point to IP address a.b.c.d\n\nTRUST AND DUMPSTER DIVING\nBeing convincing or establishing trust usually depends on the attacker obtaining privileged information about the organization or about an individual. For example, an impersonation attack is much more effective if the attacker knows the user's name. AS most companies are set up toward customer service rather than security, this information is typically easy to come by. Information that might seem innocuous, such as department employee lists, job titles, phone numbers, diary appointments, invoices, or purchase orders, can help an attacker penetrate an organization through impersonation.\n\nAnother way to obtain information that will help to make a social engineering attack credible is by obtaining documents that the company has thrown away. Dumpster  ing refers to combing through an organization's (or individual's) garbage to try to find useful documents. Attackers may even find files stored on discarded removable media.\n\nNote: Remember that attacks may be staged over a long period of time. Initial attacks may only aim at compromising low-level information and user accounts, but this low-level information can be used to attack more sensitive and confidential data and better protected management and administrative accounts.\n\nSHOULDER SURFING\nShoulder surfing refers to stealing a password or PIN, or other secure information, by watching the user type it. Despite the name, the attacker may not have to be in close proximity to the target. They could use high-power binoculars or CCTV to directly observe the target from a remote location.\n\nTAILGATING\nTailgating (or piggybacking) is a means of entering a secure area without authorization by following close behind the person that has been allowed to open the door or checkpoint. This might be done without the target's knowledge or may be a means for an insider to allow access to someone without recording it in the building's entry log. Another technique is to persuade someone to hold a door open, using an excuse such as “I've forgotten my badge/key."\ntag:C2 L6 TB

MITIGATION OF SOCIAL ENGINEERING ATTACKS\n\nSocial engineering is best defeated by training users to recognize and respond to such situations.\n\n• Train employees to release information or make privileged use of the system only according to standard procedures.\n\n• Establish a reporting system for suspected attacks—though the obvious risk here is that a large number of false negatives will be reported.\n\n• Train employees to identify phishing-style attacks plus new styles of attack as they develop in the future.\n\n• Train employees not to release any work-related information on third-party sites or social networks (and especially not to reuse passwords used for accounts at work).\n\nOther measures include ensuring documents and information is destroyed before disposal, using multifactor access control, to put more than one or two barriers between an attacker and his or her target, and restricting use of administrative accounts as far as possible.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

NETWORK FOOTPRINTING THREATS\n\nFootprinting is another information-gathering threat, in which the attacker attempts to learn about the configuration of the network and security systems. Footprinting can be accomplished by social engineering attacks. There are also many software-based tools and techniques for gathering information.\n\nNote: Footprinting describes investigating the overall network and security whereas fingerpointing describes probes the to discover how a particular host is configured.\n\nOPEN PORTS\nNetwork mapping refers to tools that gather information about the way the network is built and configured and the current status of hosts. One approach to protecting a network from unwanted footprinting or fingerprinting is to prevent unauthorized hosts, from connecting at all. An “open port” in this sense is an Ethernet port that allows any computer to connect to the switch. Ethernet ports can be physically or administratively disabled to prevent this, though that would not stop an attacker from unplugging an authorized machine and connecting a different one. There are various Network Access Control (NAC) or endpoint security solutions that can require devices to authenticate before network access is granted.\n\nAs well as the physical Ethernet port, an “open port" can also refer to a TCP or UDP network application port. Port scanning aims to enumerate the TCP or UDP application ports on a host that are accepting connections, The net stat tool can be used on Windows and Linux to investigate open connections on the local computer.\n\nMore advanced probes, such as nmap, can discover a good deal more information about a host.\n\n[file:///fig-391.png]\nDisplaying open connections with netstat. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)\n\nWhen a host running a particular operating system responds to a port scan, the syntax of the response might identify the specific operating system. This fact is also true of application servers, such as web servers, FTP servers, and mail servers. The responses these servers make often include several headers or banners that can reveal a great deal of information about the server.\n\nPorts can be closed by disabling unnecessary or unused protocols, services, and applications. If a service must be run, a port can be blocked on a particular interface or restricted to certain hosts using an Access Control List (ACL) enforced by a firewall.\n\nPort scanning tools are also useful defensive tools because a network administrator needs to ensure that unauthorized ports are not open on the network. These could be a sign of some sort of Trojan or backdoor server. Such tools often try to hide themselves from diagnostic port scans.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

EAVESDROPPING THREATS\n\nEavesdropping (or sniffing) refers to capturing and reading data packets as they move over the network. When an attacker (for example, a malicious user) has gained access to the network, they can use a packet sniffer such as Wireshark" to capture live network traffic. Unless the packets are encrypted, the attacker can gain a lot of information about the way the network is designed as well as intercepting any data transmitted in plaintext.\n\n[file:///fig-392.png]\nCapturing basic HTTP authentication in Wireshark.\n\nIn the first instance, an attack would be limited to data traffic to and from the individual user's computer (as well as broadcast traffic) as network switches will prevent all other traffic from being directed to that computer. However, switches can be subverted by various different types of attack:\n\n• MAC flooding—overloading the switch's MAC cache, referred to as the Content Addressable Memory (CAM) table, using a tool such as Dsniff or Ettercap to prevent genuine devices from connecting and potentially forcing the switch into "hub" or “flooding” mode.\n\n• ARP poisoning—the attacker poisons the switch’s ARP table with a false MAC-IP address mapping, typically allowing the attacker to masquerade as the subnet's default gateway.\n\nNote: A packet sniffer is a defensive as well as an offensive tool. It can be used to try to detect network intrusions and unauthorized and malicious traffic.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

SPOOFING AND MITM THREATS\n\nHaving gathered information about a network, an attacker may be able to probe or damage it by launching further attacks. Many of the network, transport, and application protocols in use on private networks and the Internet were designed without any regard for security. Protocols such as TCP or UDP are vulnerable to packet sniffing because they were designed to transmit information in plain text. Devices communicating using these protocols do not typically authenticate with one another, making them vulnerable to spoofing, Denial of Service, and Man-in-the-Middle attacks.\n\nSPOOFING AND PACKET/PROTOCOL ABUSE\nThe term spoofing (or impersonation or masquerade) covers a very wide range of different attacks. Social engineering and techniques such as phishing and pharming are types of spoofing attack. It also possible to abuse the way a protocol works or network packets are constructed to inject false or modified data onto a network. The ARP poisoning attack described earlier is a good example of this. The ARP and DNS protocols are often used as vectors for spoofing attacks.\n\nSpoofing can also be performed by obtaining a logical token or software token. A logical token is assigned to a user or computer when they authenticate to some service. A token might be implemented as a web cookie, for instance. if an attacker can steal the token and the authorization system has not been designed well, the attacker may be able to present the token again and impersonate the original user. This type of spoofing is also called a replay attack.\n\nMAN-IN-THE-MIDDLE ATTACK\nA Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack is another specific type of spoofing attack where the attacker sits between two communicating hosts and transparently monitors, captures, and relays all communication between them. Man-in-the-middle attacks are used to gain access to authentication and network infrastructure information for future attacks, or to gain direct access to packet contents.\n\nFor example, in an ARP poisoning attack, the attacker sends spoofed ARP messages onto the network to associate his IP address with another host, typically the subnet’ default gateway. The rest of the network hosts will then start communicating with the attacker, who will be able to sniff the packets and either send them on to the genuine host (to try to keep the attack covert), send modified versions of the packets, or drop them (performing a Denial of Service attack),  MitM attacks can be defeated using mutual authentication, where both server and client exchange secure credentials.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

PASSWORD ATTACKS\n\nComputer systems are protected by accounts and accounts are protected by credentials, typically passwords. Passwords can be discovered via social engineering or because a user has written one down, Packet sniffing attacks are often launched with the purpose of obtaining credentials for one or more accounts. If a network protocol uses cleartext credentials, then the attacker's job is done. Most passwords are only sent over the network or stored on a device using some sort of cryptographic protection, however.\n\nNote: A password might be sent in an encoded form, such as Base64, which is simply an ASCII representation of binary data. This is not the same as cryptography. The password value can easily be derived from the Base64 string.\n\n[file:///fig-394.png]\nCain and Abel password cracker.\n\nEither the channel can be protected or the password can be protected (or both). If the channel is encrypted, the attacker has to compromise the encryption keys stored on the server. If the password is protected by a cryptographic hash, the attacker might be able to use password cracking software to decipher it.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

TYPES OF PASSWORD ATTACKS.\n\nA cryptographic hash scrambles the data in a way that the original plaintext password is normally unrecoverable. However, the cryptographic hash function might be vulnerable to these types of attacks:\n\n• Dictionary—the password cracker matches the hash to those produced by ordinary words found in a dictionary. This could also include information such as user and company names or pet names or any other data that people might naively use as passwords.\n\n• Brute force—the software tries to match the hash against one of every possible combination it could be. If the password is short (under 7 characters) and non- complex (using only letters, for instance), a password might be cracked in minutes. Longer and more complex passwords increase the amount of time the attack takes to run.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

RAINBOW TABLE ATTACKS\n\nA dictionary attack can be used where there is a good chance of guessing the likely value of the plaintext. Rainbow tables refine the dictionary approach. The technique was developed by Phillipe Oechsli and used in his Ophcrack Windows password cracker. The attacker uses a precomputed lookup table of all probable plaintext passwords (derived from the dictionary) and their matching hashes. Not all possible hash values are stored, as this would require too much memory. Values are computed in "chains" and only the first and last values need to be stored. The hash value of a stored password can then be looked up in the table and the corresponding plaintext discovered.\n\nThe hash functions used to store passwords can be made more secure by adding salt. Salt is a random value added to the plaintext. This helps to slow down rainbow table attacks against a hashed password database, as the table cannot be created in advance and must be recreated for each combination of password and salt value. Rainbow tables are also impractical when trying to discover long passwords (over about 14 characters). UNIX and Linux password storage mechanisms use salt, but Windows does not. Consequently, in a Windows environment it is even more important to enforce password policies, such as selecting a strong password and changing it periodically.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

DENIAL OF SERVICE ATTACKS\n\nA Denial of Service (DoS) attack causes a service at a given host to fail or to become unavailable to legitimate users. Typically, DoS attacks focus on overloading a service. It is also possible for DoS attacks to exploit design failures or other vulnerabilities in application software. An example of a physical DoS attack would be cutting telephone lines or network cabling. DoS attacks may simply be motivated by the malicious desire to cause trouble. They may also be part of a wider attack, such as a precursor to a DNS spoofing attack.\n\nDISTRIBUTED DoS (DDoS) ATTACKS/BOTNETS\nNetwork-based DoS attacks are normally accomplished by flooding the server with bogus requests. They rely on the attacker having access to greater bandwidth than the target or on the target being required to devote more resources to each connection than the attacker. There are many different methods of achieving this, often exploiting weaknesses in protocols.\n\nMost bandwidth-directed DoS attacks are Distributed DoS (DDoS). This means that the attacks are launched from multiple compromised systems, referred to as a botnet. To establish a botnet, an attacker will first compromise one or two machines to use as "handlers" or "masters." The handlers are used to compromise multiple zombie devices with DoS tools (bots). In this way, the attacker can conceal his or her activities. This is also referred to as an asymmetric threat, because the attacker's resources can be far less than those of the victim.\n\n[file:///fig-396.png]\nDDoS attacks using zombies/drones. (Image © 123RF.com)\n\nLarge botnets are necessary to overcome the high bandwidth of targets. The increasing use of "always-on" broadband connections means that attackers can target a large base of naive home users with the aim of compromising their PCs. Also, any Internet-connected device can potentially be infected and used as a bot. Devices such as webcams that can be configured over the Internet are often vulnerable.\n\nOnce the bot is installed, the attacker has a backdoor that gives them access to the device. They can then use the backdoor to install DDoS tools and trigger the zombies to launch the attack at the same time. As well as a single attacker using a botnet, DDoS. attacks might be coordinated between groups of attackers. There is growing evidence that nation states are engaging in cyber warfare and terrorist groups have also been implicated in DDoS attacks on well-known companies and government institutions. There are also hacker collectives who might target an organization as part of a campaign.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

VULNERABILITIES AND ZERO-DAY EXPLOITS\n\nSoftware exploitation means an attack that targets a vulnerability in OS or application software or device firmware. A vulnerability is a design flaw that can cause the application security system to be circumvented or that will cause the application to crash. The most serious vulnerabilities allow the attacker to execute arbitrary code on the system, which could allow the installation of malware. Malicious code that can successfully use a vulnerability to compromise a host is called an “exploit.”\n\nNote: This issue does not just affect PCs. Any ype of network appliance or device can also be vulnerable to exploits. The risks to embedded systems have become more obvious and the risks posed by unpatched mobile devices and the “Internet of Things" is likely to grow.\n\nTypically, vulnerabilities can only be exploited in quite specific circumstances, but because of the complexity of modern software and the speed with which new versions must be released to market, almost no software is free from vulnerabilities. Most vulnerabilities are discovered by software and security researchers, who notify the vendor to give them time to patch the vulnerability before releasing details to the wider public, A vulnerability that is exploited before the developer knows about it or can release a patch is called a zero-day exploit. tis called "zero-day" because the developer has had zero days to fix the flaw. These can be extremely destructive, as it can take the vendor a lot of time to develop a patch, leaving systems vulnerable for days, weeks, or even years.\n\nWhile some zero-day attacks can be extremely destructive, they are relatively rare. A greater risk is the large number of unpatched or legacy systems in use. An unpatched or non-compliant system is one that its owner has not updated with OS and application patches or installed with A-V and firewall security software. A legacy system is one where the software vendor no longer provides support or fixes for problems.\n\nNote: There is a class of network security software described as Network Access Control (NAC) that scans devices as they attempt to join and use the network and denies access if they are non-compliant with regard to a "system health" or Standard Operating Environment (SOE) policy.\ntag:C2 L6 TB

Activity 6-2\nDiscussing Threats and Vulnerabilities\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\n1. What do all types of social engineering attack have in common?\n\n2. An attacker crafts an email addressed to a senior support technician inviting him to register for free football coaching advice. The website contains password- stealing malware. What is the name of this type of attack?\n\n3. What is the difference between tailgating and shoulder surfing?\n\n4. What type of software is typically used to perform eavesdropping on an Ethernet network?\n\n5. What attack might be launched to eavesdrop on all communications passing over a local network segment?\n\n6. An attacker learns that a system policy causes passwords to be configured with a random mix of different characters but that are only five characters in length. What type of password cracking attack would work best here?\n\n7. What is the difference between a DoS and a DDoS attack?\n\n8. With what type of threat is a "zero day" associated?\ntag:C2 L6 TB A6-2

Topic C\nPhysical Security Measures\n\n \n\nEXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED\n1002-2.1 Summarize the importance of physical security measures.\n1002-2.9 Given a scenario, implement appropriate data destruction and disposal methods.\n\nPhysical security refers to the implementation and practice of contro! methods that are intended to restrict physical access to facilities. One case where physical security is important is when there is a need to control access to physical documents, password records, and sensitive documents and equipment. One successful unauthorized access attempt can lead to financial losses, credibility issues, and legalities. In addition, physical security involves increasing or assuring the reliability of certain critical infrastructure elements such as switches, routers, and servers.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

PHYSICAL SECURITY CONTROLS\n\nPhysical security measures means controlling who can access a building or a secure area of a building, such as a server room. One of the oldest types of security is a wall with a door in it or a fence with a gate). In order to secure such a gateway, it must be fitted with a lock or door access system.\n\nLOCK TYPES\nDoor locks can be categorized as follows:\n\n• Conventional—a conventional lock prevents the door handle from being operated without the use of a key. More expensive types offer greater resistance against lock picking.\n\n• Deadbolt—this is a bolt on the frame of the door, separate to the handle mechanism.\n\n• Electronic—rather than a key, the lock is operated by entering a PIN on an electronic keypad. This type of lock is also referred to as cipher, combination, or keyless.\n\n• Token-based—a smart lock may be opened using a magnetic swipe card or feature a proximity reader to detect the presence of a wireless key fob or one-time password generator (physical tokens) or smart card.\n\n• Biometric—a lock may be integrated with a biometric scanner, so that the lock can be activated by biometric features, such as a fingerprint, voice print, or retina scan, Biometric locks make it more difficult for someone to counterfeit the key used to open the lock.\n\n• Multifactor—a lock may combine different methods, such as smart card with PIN.\n\nA secure gateway will normally be self-closing and self-locking, rather than depending  on the user to close and lock it.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

TURNSTILES AND MANTRAPS\n\nTailgating is a means of entering a secure area without authorization by following close behind the person who has been allowed to open the door or checkpoint. Training and a strict policy can mitigate the sort of instinctive politeness that causes employees to "co-operate" with this type of attack. Effective training should also ensure that employees keep doors locked to protect secure areas, such as server and equipment rooms. Gateways can also have improved physical security, such as CCTV monitoring or the presence of a security guard.\n\nAnother option is a turnstile or a mantrap. A mantrap is two sets of interlocking doors inside a small space, where the first set of doors must close before the second set opens. If the mantrap is manual, a guard locks and unlocks each door in sequence. In this case, an intercom or video camera is typically used to allow the guard to control the trap from a remote location. If the mantrap is automatic, identification or a key of some kind may be required for each door, and sometimes different measures may be required for each door. Metal detectors are often built in to prevent entrance of people carrying weapons. Such use is particularly frequent in banks and jewelry shops.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

SECURITY GUARDS\n\nHuman security guards, armed or unarmed, can be placed in front of and around a location to protect it. They can monitor critical checkpoints and verify identification, allow or disallow access, and log physical entry occurrences. They also provide a visual deterrent and can apply their own knowledge and intuition to potential security breaches.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

ID BADGES AND SMART CARDS\n\nA photographic 1D badge showing name and (perhaps) access details is one of the cornerstones of building security. Anyone moving through secure areas of a building should be wearing an ID badge; anyone without an ID badge should be challenged.\n\nRadio Frequency ID (RFID) badges can be used with proximity badge readers to monitor the location of the subject. When the RFID badge passes a reader (with a range up to about 5 m), it registers a signal and transmits its ID to the management software.\n\n[file:///fig-401.png]\nA contactless smart card reader. (Image © 123RF.com)\n\nAs well as using RFID tracking, smart card badges and key fobs can be programmed with biometric authentication or with some sort of token-generating or certificate-based authentication. This type of badge could be used to open smart locks, as described earlier.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

ENTRY CONTROL ROSTERS\n\nAn electronic lock may be able to log access attempts but if no technological solution is available, a security guard can manually log movement using a sign-in and sign-out sheet. An entry control roster requires all visitors to sign in and out when entering and leaving the building. Logging requirements will vary depending on the organization, but should include the following:\n\n• Name and company being represented.\n\n• Date, time of entry, and time of departure.\n\n• Reason for visiting,\n\n• Contact within the organization.\n\nWhen possible, one single entry point should be used for all incoming vi decreases the risk of unauthorized individuals gaining access to the building and tailgating.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

PHYSICAL SECURITY CONTROLS FOR DEVICES\n\nThe most vulnerable point of the network infrastructure will be the communications room. This should be subject to the most stringent access and surveillance controls that can be afforded.\n\nCABLE LOCKS AND LOCKING CABINETS\nAnother layer of security can be provided by installing equipment within lockable rack cabinets. These can be supplied with key-operated or electronic locks.\n\n[file:///fig-402.png]\nRack cabinet with key-operated lock. (Image by Bunlue Nantaprom © 123RF.com)\n\nServer-class hardware often features physical chassis security (server locks). The chassis can be locked, preventing access to the power switch, removable drives, and USB ports. An attacker with access to these might be able to boot the machine with a different operating system to try to steal data or install malware. If there is no chassis protection and the computer cannot be located in a secure room, another tool is a USB lock. This device engages springs to make it difficult to remove from a USB port unless the key is used, Although they can deter and delay, they are unlikely to prevent a determined attacker.\n\nIf installing equipment within a cabinet is not an option, it is also possible to obtain cable hardware locks for use with portable devices such as laptops.\n\nPRIVACY SCREENS\nA privacy screen prevents anyone but the user from reading the screen. Modern TFTs are designed to be viewed from wide angles. This is fine for home entertainment use but raises the risk that someone would be able to observe confidential information shown on a user's monitor. A privacy filter restricts the viewing angle to only the person directly in front of the screen.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

DATA DISPOSAL METHODS\n\nAs well as the security of premises, equipment rooms, and devices, physical security measures also need to account for the media on which data is stored. Remnant removal refers to decommissioning data storage media, including hard disks, flash drives, tape media, and CDs/DVDs. The problem has become particularly prominent as organizations recycle their old computers, either by donating them to charities or by sending them to a recycling company, who may recover and sell parts. There are at least three reasons that make remnant removal critical:\n\n• An organization's own confidential data could be compromised.\n\n• Third-party data that the organization processes could be compromised, leaving it liable under Data Protection legislation, in addition to any contracts or Service Level Agreements signed.\n\n• Software licensing could be compromised.\n\nThe main issue is understanding the degree to which data on different media types may be recoverable. Data "deleted" from a magnetic-type disk such as a hard disk is not erased. Rather, the sectors are marked as available for writing and the data they contain will only be removed as new files are added. Similarly, using the standard Windows format tool will only remove references to files and mark all sectors as useable. In the right circumstances and with the proper tools, any deleted information from a drive could be recoverable.\n\nThere are several approaches to the problem of data remnants on magnetic disks.\n\nPHYSICAL DESTRUCTION\nA magnetic disk can be mechanically shredded, incinerated, or degaussed in specialist machinery:\n\n• Shredding—the disk is ground into little pieces. A mechanical shredder works in much the same way as a paper shredder.\n\n• Incineration—exposing the disk to high heat melts its components.\n\n• Degaussing—exposing the disk to a powerful electromagnet disrupts the magnetic pattern that stores the data on the disk surface.\n\nThese types of machinery are costly and will render the disk unusable, so it cannot be recycled or repurposed.\n\nNote: There are many companies specializing in secure disposal. They should provide a certificate of destruction, showing the make, model, and serial number of each drive they have handled plus date of destruction and the means by which it was destroyed.\n\nA less expensive method is to destroy the disk with a drill or hammer—do be sure to wear protective goggles. This method is not appropriate for the most highly confidential data as it will leave fragments that could be analyzed using specialist tools.\n\nOptical media cannot be reformatted. Discs should be destroyed before discarding them. Shredders are available for destroying CD and DVD discs.\n\nOVERWRITING/DISK WIPING\nIf a disk can be recycled or repurposed, destruction is obviously not an option. Disk wiping software ensures that old data is destroyed by writing to each location on the media, either using zeroes or in a random pattern. This leaves the disk in a "clean" state ready to be passed to the new owner. This overwriting method is suitable for all but the most confidential data, but is time consuming and requires special software.\n \n[file:///fig-404.png]\nActive KillDisk data wiping software.\n\nLOW LEVEL FORMAT\nMost disk vendors supply tools to reset a disk to its factory condition, These are often described as low level format tools and will have the same sort of effect as disk wiping software. A "proper" low level format creates cylinders and sectors on the disk. This can generally only be done at the factory. The disk utilities just clean data from each sector; they don't re-create the sector layout.\n\nNote: Check with the drive vendor for more information. For example, Seagate describe the tools available at knowledge.seagate.com/articles/en_US/FAQ/203931en.\ntag:C2 L6 TC

Activity 6-3\nDiscussing Physical Security Measures\n\nSCENARIO\nAnswer the following questions to check your understanding of the topic.\n\n1. Katie works in a high-security government facility. When she comes to work in the morning, she places her hand on a scanning device in her building's lobby, which reads her hand print and compares it to a master record of her hand print in a database to verify her identity.  What type of security control is this?\n\n2. Why might an ID badge not be restricted to use at doors and gateways?\n\n3. What sort of information should be recorded on an entry control roster?\n\n4. What is a server lock?\n\n5. What type of device would a privacy screen be used to protect?\n\n6. What three methods of mechanically destroying a hard disk are most effective?\ntag:C2 L6 TC A6-3

Summary\n\nIn this lesson, you explored general security concepts. Every organization will have different security requirements based on the type of business they conduct. It is your job to understand those requirements and know how security controls should be implemented to directly support those needs.\n\nWhat physical security controls have been employed at organizations where you have worked?\n\nWhat steps has your organization taken to ensure the security of mobile devices? Have you planned ahead in case the devices are lost or stolen? If so, how?\ntag:C2 L6 SUMMARY

